The mothers, with their eyes full of tears and in an ecstasy said these words to Bharata who was thus speaking. And bowing down to Rama they begged him (to stay there).
In your line, Sagara had a eldest son called Asamanja; he should go (to heaven).
Without seeing Vaidehi, with eyes resembling lotus-petals and ever wearing the auspicious garland of her own hands, my life has no worth.
Those that move quickly and shine in the battle-field are said to be immortal. They destroy all enemies, when placed on both sides of a hero engaged in war.
O foremost of monkeys, the hearts of those (monkeys) are always agitated. Without your son and wife they cannot bear even such a small thing as my permission to go away from here."
O descendant of Bharata, adored by your sons and all the soldiers with great devotion. He shone forth like the sun at midday on account of his own prowess.
As those mansions were being searched by the wind and fire, they began to be broken up; their golden networks as well as gems of various kinds fell down on earth.
It also penetrated into the forces of Virata, those of Drupada and his sons and grandsons as well as their friends.
And in that river he saw a great forest of Saugandhika trees, capable of producing delight and having the effulgence of young sun.
Bhishma said As the soul resides in the body, so does a son reside in his father and daughter-in-law. How can any one take away another's wealth when that person himself is living?
Trembling and pained with fear she again began to think of that terrible curse which the Rishi had given her.
And going through that forest, he wandered on all sides, looking in the direction of every quarter and saying “Where shall I find refuge?"
As the loud sound of that great elephant, which had been born from mud and which was moving about among those foot-soldiers, reached his ears Bhima went towards it.
Then the worshipful Rishi Narada, receiving that adoration and consoling Dharmaraja Yudhishthira in due form as it were, said these words.
This is what I have got today. And this will be the fulfilment of my desire; and, again, this shall not prove a loss to me in future.
That person, whose mind and senses run after objects in this world (for gratifying their desires), acquires covetousness for them; then actions are performed.
These five sons of Draupadi, resembling the five mountains and all desirous of fighting are ready for battle.
O descendant of Bharata, take refuge in him with all your heart. Through his grace you shall attain that eternal happiness which is so great and blissful.
Bhishma said : The king of Mithila was very much pleased with the instructions given by that intelligent and highly blessed son of Bhrigu, viz., Yajnavalkya.
The Pandavas, with the Panchalas and Kekayas and Matsyas, took up their weapons and went forth in haste.
Whether he is a Rakshasa or whether be is a man we do not know, having slain the king of Panchala and riding on his car, he stands there.
Saying, 'Be it so,' Hanumān of dreadful prowess determined the destruction of his grief. And then saluting Sītā with joined hands he prepared for departure (to Rama).
Those foremost of men, after conversing on various topics for sometime and thinking over the subject for a short while, looked at Krishna.
The earth also began to shake with the noise of that intelligent and roaring Khara, who was seated on his car.
O best of the Bharata race, then those kings made a treaty with six Brahmanas who were learned in knowledge and Vedanta. They also engaged two other Brahmana priests one was well versed in Veda while the other knew all about Agnihotra sacrifice. Accompanied by their servants they sent for peace on every side as it ought to be done according to usage and then fixed up three camps (for the kings) each having five hundred warriors under its command. They also arranged that elephants should stand at intervals so as to prevent any confusion among them. Having thus settled everything the king addressed these Brahmanas saying “O foremost of twice-born ones, when this work has been undertaken during an auspicious day belonging to a good star I wish you to perform what is agreeable to your own desire. Do not let time pass away here; do whatever else there may be necessary." Hearing the words of the monarch those Brahmanas along with their followers being pleased said "Let us wait till tomorrow morning which belongs to such a bright constellation.”
Prajapati's son, the Prachetas, thus narrated this discourse on immortality. Brahma himself approved it.
Senajit said : O Brahmana, what is your understanding? What is the merit of your austerities? And what are those Samadhis by which you do not grieve.
Having gained the respect of all by his sacrificial fire, and other sacrifices, as also by his saffron robe and matted hair, he then began to live like a wolf.
The maid-servants said : Let him stay at the gate of this village on one leg for his livelihood. He is righteous, but he has forsaken virtue; and it was he who stole your cow.
Hanumān regarded the son of Vali as gifted with eight faculties and furnished with four attributes, and as possessed of fourteen parts. And he conceived that it was ever increasing in energy and strength and prowess like a moon appearing full at its crescent stage; or even like Brihaspati himself resembling his father (Indra) in prowess; just as Purandara is served by Shukra.
And Rāma with his eyes reddened in wrath, suddenly pierced Khara with a thousand shafts.
Thereupon the highly energetic Bhishma, that son of Shantanu and greatly effulgent hero having first asked for his permission thus said.
Let our friends and well-wishers live, as the birds on a tree in that abode of yours which is like an asylum.
The speech of that great man is always true, be it on any subject. That warrior for whom Dhananjaya (Arjuna) fights even the three worlds will belong to him.
Having thus done this work, O Rākşasa; go wherever you like. I shall give you half the kingdom (after my death), O Marica of good vows.
One should act in fear as long as the danger is not near, but when it has come he must face it without being deterred by any fear.
Yudhishthira said : O best of the Kurus, tell me how a king who wishes to follow virtue should govern his kingdom.
O son, I take the Kauravas for being already killed by death. Their prowess in battle is not seen now as it was before.
Then those two foremost of men, the Madhava and Pandava (Arjuna), arriving at Drona's bowstring became situated in the very van of battle.
Thereupon, that one having his bow cut off by the latter with a large number of arrows, and himself also wounded deeply with those shafts shot swiftly from the hands of an enemy.
Hearing these words of the sage, Rāghava said to him : “I shall destroy that Rakşasa. Depart from this place and do you not fear.”
And as if crushed by the thunder-bolt, those elephants thus pierced with thousands of arrows and well-trained in battle were lying down on earth. The son of Arjuna (Bhima) was roaming about slaughtering his foes along with their horses, cars, foot-soldiers and elephants.
If it be there, O descendant of Bharata, I shall take it. Then will the illustrious council chamber with its beautiful and expansive mind; adorned on all sides by gems and jewels, and containing a sword which is an effulgent stream, and also that mace whose handle resembles a sharp-edged razor,-be made ready for Pandu's son.
The king said : O Brahmana, I do not wish to live by any unfair means or by display of pride. Nor am I willing that my riches should be spent in unworthy objects and purposes.
Having bowed down and accepted his wealth, he enquired about the welfare of all members (of the household), especially that of their maternal uncle. Then Rāma sat himself on a seat; and desirous of knowing what was in his mind, asked him saying, "What does my maternal uncle say? Forsooth has come here the foremost among those learned in speech as well as Brahma's own son."
That chastiser of foes struck some with his fists, and others he crushed by means of the nails on his fingers; then again he brought down many more by pressing them against his breast.
The Vedas have the Agnihotra for their head; and Gayatri is the chief of all metres. The king has been declared as being the head of mankind, and ocean at that of rivers; the moon is said to be the principal luminary among stars, while Aditya is the soul of energy in the universe. Meru is called the head of mountains, Garuda (the vahana of Vishnu) is considered as the leader of birds.
Sahadeva too, assuming the dress of a cowherd and bringing milk curds butter etc. brought them for his brothers.
Remembering his own share, the king Sahadeva went there on a car of golden hue and approached Shakuni.
It is through Destiny that the pious Rāma, having truth for his weapon, and Laksmana of great energy who increases Mitr's delight are hale.
Time takes everything; time gives away all. Everything is fixed by the course of Nature, so do not put your trust in strength, O Shakra (Indra).
And the wind began to roar, foreboding a terrible calamity. Then fearful and awful winds began to blow there with dreadful roars.
How, O powerful king is a kingdom of which the ruler has been slain capable of being maintained? Therefore accept this embryo and let Bhishma bring it up.
And we have been thus wronged by our friends, and all the kings as well.
There is none in the world who would not, without any hesitation or delay kill this wretch of a man when he speaks ill.
O best of the Satvata race, this was Drona's estimate of Rama and Kārtavīrya and Arjuna. And that foremost among men Bhishma; also he highly praised him for his prowess.
And overcome by his anger and struck with blood, he began to attack the monkeys, Rākşasas and bears.
As that tree, covered with creepers and branches and twigs. The terrible bees of various forms and fearful aspect, dwelling in the roots of its branches before it had been overtaken by any other living creature, having their abode there, were engaged in drinking honey from the flowers (on those trees).
Seeing the car with Keshava covered by a net-work of arrows and seeing also their enemies before them burning like two fires.
Vaishampayana said : Then roaming through the different quarters, those best of bowmen (the Pandavas), killing deer and boars and buffaloes met together.
Then the Rākṣasa and Pishacha, and Yatudhana became invisible.
The peacocks which are of the colour of Haridra (yellow), with golden feathers, cut off from a stone and having five marks resembling those on a lion's neck.
In that town, O king there were some principal Brahmanas of pure birth and good conduct. They lived according to the ordinances laid down for them in their scriptures.
Hearing these words of hers and remembering them, the king said : "I do not remember it. O wicked ascetic, whose are you?"
The eleven senses, as mentioned by you in their order one after the other are well known. They should be considered as created when properly understood and analysed with due care."
I never saw a warrior in the world equal to Arjuna, who can loose sixty-eight sharp and keen-edged arrows from his bow.
Tell me, O king what you have come here for. I am not at present engaged in the administration of my kingdom; but tell me everything and let my mind be satisfied.”
The battle was fought between them for a long time. When one thousand men were killed and thrown on the ground, many Kabandas rose up from their corpses.
The terrible-looking Asura was then filled with thousands of other persons, who were killed and also with innumerable elephants and horses.
Therefore do I, today myself perform your sacrifice O destroyer of foes. That foremost of Brahmanas having his origin in me is now on the ground.
Rāghava, with joined hands and in a cheerful spirit said, O twice-born one! These two heroes, the sons of Bharata, Takşa and Pușpaka shall range this country. Protected by their maternal uncle Sugriva they are well-versed in morality and have brought under subjection many powerful Gandharvas; and having killed them (the Gandharva) these princes shall divide up your kingdom between themselves.'
Sanjaya said O king, as Sahadeva was advancing for fighting with Drona the son of Vikartana (Karna) stopped him in battle.
Even such a battle on earth or in heaven has never been heard of. That army stood fast, with cars and horses and men and elephants."
O you that give honours, what is the merit in always worshipping Brahmanas? Tell us this frankly. This doubt of mine has been great.
That excellent and sweet weapon which was given by the three-eyed great God (Shiva) for destroying his enemies, if it be kept in a house with due adoration and if all directions are properly looked after, one obtains superior food. If however any enemy wishes battle he is destroyed by fixing that staff on him.
And obtaining the king's permission, he left that crowd of men and entered into his inner apartment like a lion entering into an cave in a mountain.
And behind them were seen black, ill-looking and terrible sounding jackals, bearing bells on their necks; with blue throats and looking like Vibhishana.
Brahmanas are the great and foremost of all persons, they should be considered as excellent supports for virtue. They who live in celibacy or practise other vows and fasts,
And, thus assailed by the summit of a mountain he fell down senseless on earth. Beholding that lord of monkeys lying on ground deprived of his senses in consequence of being wounded (by Hanumān), those Yātudhānas began to send up shouts of joy.
As soon as the mighty Ashvatthaman had thus leaped up from his bed, he grasped him by his hair and dashed him on the ground.
When I wish for it, O son and when the moon is in her wane, shall I sport eternally with Shakra.
And beholding that foremost of car-warriors, those two heroes capable of vanquishing all weapons enter into our host what sort of courage did my troops display?
Being excited with the stroke of arrows, (Rāma) took up his bow and set an arrow on it. That exceedingly energetic descendant of Kakutstha resembled the sun at the time of dissolution.
Others, who are not known by any name and whose means of livelihood depend on the use of short measures. O descendant of Kuru! There also live with them many noble men belonging to various races; those rivers which flow through that country drink up all the large and small streams in it,-the Gangs the Sindhu and Sarasvati, Godavari Narmada Bahuda Mahanadi Shatadru Chandrabhaga Yamuna Dridha Vathi Viapashi Vipapa Sthulavaluka Vidarvari Krishnavena Minanga Iravati Vitasti Payoshni Devika Vedasmitra Vedavati Tridiva Amikshula Krmi Karishini Chitrava Chitra Sena Gomati Dhutpapa Vanadanana Kosiki Triyama Lohitarani Rahasya Shahatkumbha Sarayu Vetriveri Hastisoma Dishti Charmana Bhima Bhimarathe Sharavana Payoshtina Vadava Bhimiratha Kaaveri Culuca Rajani Pauramalini Purabhiraami Bhima Bhumaghata Mata Pravar Maka Makara Hemagiri Menakai Padala Vasatra Sukastri Kushadhara Sadanirahda Ratri Sudakanta Shivaya Viramatya Astrovastrini Suvarna Kapila Ambuvahi Vinodi Pingla Tungaveno Vishvamartha Kadisha Krishna Veno Tamrachuli Khelu Subham Harashravamahapraghana
The son of Pandu, having contracted his brows and manifested the signs of anger in his countenance, filled with water a large conch called Devadatta.
Others, stupefied by the illusion which was caused in them and blinded by it were killed on that field of battle; others went away from there being dead.
The divine creatures, the Siddhas and foremost of Rishis always worship him in this way with Yoga and eternal Vedic knowledge.
When the monkey's tail was burning, those Rākşasīs with their eyes elongated like lotus leaves, began to relate what they considered as bad news for Sītă.
O descendant of Bharata, many powerful Rakshasas and cannibals followed him out of thirst for blood. Many innumerable fierce ghosts also desirous of eating the flesh of sons born from Gandharvas came after Bharata.
Thereat, the haughty Ravana was highly enraged with that Kakutstha; and he became exceedingly angry.
Thereupon, he (Karna), with ten arrows and his two Parshni's as charioteers, pierced the horses of Ashvatthaman on their backs.
O hundred-rimmed one, these acts of mine will not produce any fruit. They are the result either of my power or of my wealth and of what I have acquired by them.
Then that preceptor's son, the youthful Yuyutsu, with arrows of great impetuosity and speed. Rushed at him as he was coming on his car; but Partha cut off those shafts before they could reach him in battle.
Bhishma said : The highly blessed and powerful Bharadvaja thus spoke to him, “O Saudasa, you need not be afraid. Do what I tell you."
The golden rays of the sun that burn everything with their energy, are like this weapon of Nakula.
Do you, O lord of the universe, by this excellent knowledge make me obedient. I promise that from now on my heart will be entirely devoted to your service.”
In the Treta Yuga, all those great and powerful beings that were created came together. And they arranged for the happiness of mobile as well as immobile creatures.
A foolish man, who is a glutton at his own expense, makes many enemies. Victory over the earth means nothing if you have not conquered your appetite for food."
By Draupadi, by you who had robbed the wealth of others and also by these other cruel-minded ones all those acts that were done according to your own nature have been brought about.
Then Rāma took up a shaft resembling the sun, furnished with wings of gold and having in its point the rod of Brahman, Death and Time. And O king, that shaft, like Indra's thunder-bolt or wind itself for speed, sharpened at both ends, well-fletched and whetted on stone; then Rama hurled it towards Nīsaņa, which blazed forth brilliantly like the flame of fire (when poured into) melted butter.
Thereupon, O Bharata, a dreadful and wonderful battle took place between us which struck terror into all creatures.
Look at these kings, older than yourself; they are all angry with you. O Krishna, it behoves you therefore to forgive them as I have done.
Those ascetics, who had been purified by all the Tirthas (sacred waters), went next to Brahmasthira. They bathed in those sacred and pure waters which were like fire for removing sin; they ate their food that was gathered from the ground or picked up on it as the last grain of a heap of rice.
Then Lakşmaņa said : O sinless one, we are being guarded by you. We have no fear; and we see that righteousness has been followed (in this matter). Why should I not sleep in peace with Dasaratha's son on the ground along side Sītā?
O beautiful lady, there is no shame in you for trusting me. By the truth I swear by you that O goddess, what your words are will be fulfilled (by me).
It is certain that the shrines of penances are always wet with tears when a Brahmana loses his wealth.
Those two foremost of carwarriors, those best of men in that battle pierced each other with numerous and keen arrows.
That which is called nature does not produce those qualities that belong to individual beings. It is the soul, as existing before this world in a previous life, and according to its deeds then acquired by it, who produces them now after birth into the present existence.
O Karna, all the celestials and also all your excellent warriors have been highly delighted. Your standard is now burning up with great splendour.
The path through which Bhima was passing looked like a great tree struck by the wind. Beholding that son of Vikartana in battle,
That man who, with controlled soul and subdued passions reads this account of Indra's victory in the next world as well as on earth is freed from his sins and attains to heaven.
The citizens, O Bharata were greatly pleased with those sweet speeches and friendly words.
When the great cause of destruction (of that sacrifice) was created, a learned and intelligent officer who knew all about architecture said these words when he saw those works going on in the sacrificial ground.
Tell me, O Sanjaya, what the fight between Ashvathama and Arjuna was like; as also of those other kings that fought with Pandavas.
The king of the Merus has a son named Kesarin who rules over that kingdom, which is very rich and golden in virtue of its being under the influence of Surya.
Having obtained the firmament, he placed himself on that chariot of Indra. And by his own energy he shone brighter than the Sun (himself).
Shalya wounded the son of Suta with ninety arrows and his own charioteer he pierced in return with three straight-going shafts.
The chest should be protected by patience. One's hands and feet also, one's eyes as well as ears, with the help of his mind which in turn is controlled by knowledge, can protect oneself from all misfortune through their respective functions.
Having acquired asceticism from Arjuna and having been received by the Gandharvas headed by Tumburu, he deceived all his enemies.
Those, who renounce their physical bodies by the practice of severe asceticism in this world, get into that high place and become possessed of great beauty.
The god of gods, in the evening hour gives wealth and happiness to his pure-born worshippers. This is called by him as Namabheda Tapas (worship with the help of holy names). It also brings about worldly success. In Vedas it has been said that self-acquirement can be gained through ten means.
That state of mind by which a person endures virtue, desire and profit in the same way as he would endure fire or poison is called Rajas.
In battle the mighty Kumbhakarna, armed with his mace looked like Indra himself and when he wielded a lance in fight, he resembled Death (himself)
Slaying him (the son of Subala) the foremost among all warriors Bhima, accompanied by his brothers went towards Hastinapur.
If the force of a child's arm were so great, how could he perform coition with his mother?
Seeing that weapon unsheathed, the entire mobile and immobile universe trembled. And seeing it drawn out for battle, all creatures were filled with fear of its wielder,
He is the master of this world, as well as your own. It was he who has made this earth and all these Pandavas.
In the same way do these rivers, rich in water and capable of cleansing men's sins, flow like rivulets into this ocean of life.
Nakula and Sahadeva, who follow the footsteps of their preceptor, how can they be free from hunger? This thought created a great agitation in my mind.
O king, on the banks of that river all the celestials with Vasava (Indra), Vishvadevas and Maruts and Gandharvaas Apsarās, Dvapayana, Shuka, Krishna, Madhusudan, Yakshas Raksasa Pishachas. And many other thousands of men who had acquired success in Yoga came there; o repressor of foes! Thereafter having killed before hand those two Asuras-Madhu-Kaitabha VISHņu bathed in a best of Tirtha, excellent one and famous for piety,
It is through this that one acquires a good birth and also becomes the purifier of his race. One should offer food, which has been properly prepared (in accordance with all rules), in four kinds consisting of very little quantity but capable of satisfying every body's hunger; such kind of food when given away increases without any diminution. Therefore it is proper for Brahmanas to take their meals from persons who are thus engaged in giving away food.
One who acts properly and rightly, succeeds in acquiring a body that is well formed. Those men whose actions are improper and irregulars have bodies which are improperly shaped.
Tell me all this. I have acted well in rescuing him. Great is my gratitude for it.”
What, indeed, shall we say when the two heroes, Hrishikesha and Dhananjaya (Krishna and Arjuna), having been deprived of their weapons by us in battle, will come here as friends?
Behold, O conch, the white-bannered Bhima and also that celestial-sounding horn of Shantanu's son. Behold those two foremost warriors belonging to our side, namely Janardana with his bow in hand and Dhrishtadyumna who has pierced through their ranks.
O foremost of Raghus, you are like a holy person. Hearing your praises men on earth shall attain their objects."
And fixing his gaze upon Narayana, and saluting Mahadeva with a delighted heart he said.
This long shaft, with a head of iron and shot from the bow-string drawn back up to his ear is borne by Arjuna in battle.
And then having adored the fire which was blazing, and honoured him with flowers. Thereat they both joyfully performed a round of that flaming god in all humility; and thence Sugrīva as well as Rāghava attained maturity (in age).
Jamvuka said : Listen, O you of long arms! what the mouse has just told me. "Fie on this mighty-armed king of men; today I have been killed by him."
Taking the earth by one of his horns, that hero O king, stretched it out as far as a hundred Yojanas.
When his body was thus pierced, Vrikodara fell down and trembled like a snake deprived of its poison. Then regaining consciousness he grasped the handle of that excellent car (which had been broken) with both hands; but again losing it once more let out a loud roar.
Hothravahana said : O amiable lady, you shall see Rama in the great forest who is ever engaged in austere penances. He is truthful and of mighty strength.
The fierce wind, checked forcibly by me before with my prowess, came again; and uprooting trees and mountains and everything else.
On Rāma having said these words, Laksmana was greatly agitated in mind; and with a clouded understanding he went away without entering his own house.
Then Khara, with great force coming out of the army and taking his station in its front, began to pursue Shuka. And those exceedingly energetic birds, viz., Yajñashatru, Karavīra, Parusha, Kālkarmukha (one whose weapon was a bow), Hemamali, Mahāmāli, Sosya,* Ruru,** that blood-drinking one, these twelve powerful ones proceeded against Khara. *Sosya means "without wings." **Ruru has been variously interpreted as a bird without feet or an eagle.
Then the son of Drona, smilingly said to that slayer of hostile kings Pandu's son who was engaged in killing his enemies with arrows, “O Partha! do you throw your weapons aside."
Yudhishthira said You should not have a desire for any of these things. If you wish them, it is only through your love of wealth that you want them.
From the angry Karna and others, O king, a conflagration sprang up with its smoke and flames.
Just as in days of yore, O king, Shakuni and I began a game at dice; so now do we begin this one.
Those heroes, the sons of Aditi killed those born by Diti; and this terrible battle between Daitya (Mahabali) and Indra.
Those acts which are sanctioned by virtue, and those that are forbidden (by it), should be accepted as true. Let him who wishes for wealth give up all his possessions; the eternal religion of man cannot thus be given up on account of riches.
Bhima was enraged with those who were standing in his way. He jumped down from the chariot and fought on, holding a mace (in his hand).
O best of the Bharata race, he is called a renouncer who has such a view. No one should leave his house like an ignorant man and come into the forest abandoning everything.
Saying this, the heroes proceeded towards battle. Encouraging Arjuna and pointing out the direction which was dear to their father, they marched on.
If the wicked are not punished, there can be no peace and tranquillity in this world. What then is virtue for us?
O son of Bharadvaja, the illustrious Shakuntala is being addressed by me as your daughter. You must marry her according to our wish; therefore this your son will be called Bhara (Bhavat).
Then the Pandava army began to make a great noise on all sides. Hearing their shouts of joy, your troops too were greatly rejoiced.
O sinless one, your son-in-law (Bhima) seeing the standard of Shalya fallen on earth like a woman in her season,
Sahadeva, the son of Madri and Dantakara (Arjuna) defeated those Kalingas who had come there. He remembered in his right arm that mighty warrior.
The Brahmana is the great god and learned men are his priests. When he becomes angry, one should propitiate him; when he shows himself pleased, then too one should please him in order that he may not be displeased with you.
Then, O monarch, the king Yudhishthira believing Suyodhana slain rushed furiously towards that spot where was Vrikodara.
I shall, O best of the Bharata race, soon confer upon you every blessing. Know me for your son who have come here with a view to solve this doubt (of mine).
They have described in various ways the various means of acquiring knowledge. Therefore, you should acquire that which has been recommended by them and sanctioned both by scripture and good conduct as well.
He (Duryodhana) having thus wounded them, rushed at Yudhishthira like a disease that has been resisted by medicine and mantras but which again reappears in all its strength.
From the middle of his face, he created Brihaspati (the preceptor of the gods), from his right eye Angiras and Agni; and by means of his vital airs Vayu.
Does he not grieve? Is his mind disturbed? Or is it steady in the performance of royal duties.
This Rāma, endowed with firm strength and great intelligence has arrived. And along with his brother Lakşmana possessed of prowess in battle, this truthful hero (Rama) is come here."
And, O mighty-armed one, Rāma shall become steadfast; and he shall be subject to misfortune in consequence of his having no comfort. He will meet with a great loss through the withdrawal from him (of those) who are dear to him, as well as you yourself and Maithili and Satrughna and Bharata. The righteous-souled one shall forsake himself by and bye.
O daughter, you know my constant state of enmity. Suyodhana does not accept the words that I speak even when they are spoken in anger.
Those Pandavas, the sons of Madri and Bhima and Arjuna all praised Yudhishthira with modesty.
Bhishma said He who is the first in a sea of waters, he whose boat is also the foremost one and he who is either Shudra or any other person should be considered as entitled to all respect.
Consuming the dead bodies of all creatures, Bharata became Agni. And with his mind set on performing a horse-sacrifice, he was that best of sacrifices (to the Pitris).
And, therefore, the goddess of night was pleased with her and she came there. From that time Sauti became a truthful man from his acts as well as words.
O ranger of the night, what have I been able now to do you? You had already been slain by your own actions.
Did they ever get this world of theirs, eternal and full of happiness? Or have I been enjoying all these things without them or with their help?”
O sinless one, you can by uttering various words again and again (try) to remove the king of the celestials desire for your ear-rings.
O Brahmana, there is no physician who can cure a man bitten by the venom of an Ashi poison.
And all with their faces like those of tigers and jackals, the best of men were arrayed in silken mail.
The light of the sun sees all forms. All forms are said to be many; they may also be described as short, long, thick and square or oblong in shape. They can again be classed under white, black, red, yellow, blue and green colours. Again, hard, rough sharp, smooth, slender, soft, strong and brittle are their qualities.
Thousands of grief and hundreds of fear seize a fool every day, but not an intelligent man.
Where Brahmanas are learned in the Vedas and always observe their duties, one acquires both here and hereafter the merit of giving away.
Now hear from me, what is the most secret of all subjects. I have been convinced that you are worthy and for this reason will tell you something which is good for you.
I have now described the duties of human beings as also their religion, all this being true and in accordance with reason. This is what leads one to Heaven or happiness hereafter.
Yudhishthira said : O you who know righteousness, I wish to hear about the virtues of forgiveness and devotion. Tell me this, O grandfather!
The orb of the Sun, O king, enveloped with darkness and covered by clouds looks like a Kabandha when rising in the morning.
The diadem-decked son of Kunti, though following the horse and stopping at times in his course for rest; yet reached the capital of Yudhishthira according to his own pleasure.
Thereafter Drona, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, began to scorch those mighty bowmen with his shafts resembling the burning rays of the sun.
Water is the origin of all things. It produces heat by its evaporation and wind with it; then as a result, moisture and old age set in (in animals).
As the sky with stars and moon, when its end comes is darkened by planets; so your troops having been frightened being slain (by me) are fleeing away.
Narada said O powerful king, you ask me about Harischandra. I shall tell you the highness of that intelligent one (Harishchandra).
Thereupon I, greatly enraged and possessed by the wrath of death, hurled at him a dart resembling serpent-venom.
How great is the action of Rāma, having knowledge within himself! How his energy and strength are manifest like Vişnu's.
O great king, that man who does everything censurable amongst men should be killed by all people for his having done censurable deeds.
The highly powerful Somadatta is the son of Kusa and Ashva. His son Kakustha, who has been known by this name, had a very energetic son whose city was (this) Pratyusha. That one endued with great prowess is living in that well-known city called Sumati which cannot be subdued even by him.
The wise Balhika, the strong Bhima and King Suyodhana who is both powerful and accomplished. But a person of accomplishments stands superior (to one that has power).
I shall today, O Laksmana, dry up this river as well as all other rivers of the world if Sītā having a countenance like that moon does not disclose herself to me.
Then, O monarch, seeing Karna thus stationed for battle, the mighty-armed Sahadeva speedily alighted from his excellent car and rushed upon him with all possible haste.
Having paid their adorations, the Brahmanas went away after saluting king Yudhishthira. The Pandavas and all those who were with them felt great delight on this occasion.
The black crow, who was so eager for a living and whose clothes had been torn by the vultures when he came there in search of food did not show any signs of being affected with grief.
When the juice of milk is separated from it, when grain after being pounded by a mill yields oil or butter. Similarly semen also comes out in due time from the body through certain organs which are created for that purpose.
And iron lances, swords and axes; numerous spears and Tomaras fell down.
How did that death overtake Drona, the mighty-armed warrior who always delighted in battle and who was well-skilled in all weapons?
O Shakra, it is not we who have done this. It was you that did all this and also us for being so weak as to fall into the snare of your device.
Sanjaya said Thereupon, O king, Shalya speedily proceeded on his car towards the place where Bhima of great strength and energy was killing your troops.
Yudhishthira said : O foremost of the Bharata race, what kind of men should be made kings and how should they rule? Tell me this.
What other monkey or what else is there than Vali and Hanuman that can withstand the army of monkeys?
O son of Kunti, you should also always worship the highly blessed Brahmanas with your words and gifts.
The Sadhyas said : Who has enveloped the world? By whom is it not seen (by us)? Who have we been deprived of our friends and who do we not go up to heaven.
Vaishampayana said : Having obtained the boon, O son of Kunti, Dharmavya (Yudhishthira) came out of water and embraced his two brothers.
Thousands of lions and tigers, elephants and birds belonging to the winged race went before that army.
Then a dreadful combat raged between Bhimasena and Hidimba, like that which had taken place in days of yore between Vritra (the Asura) and Vasava.
Hearing Sugrīva's words fraught with reason and beneficial, Kākutstha accepted Hanumān as his ally.
The left arm of Yudhishthira, well developed and having a round upper part; resembling the colour of the clouds in autumn or that of sandal paste; covered with perspiration by means of his excellent and beloved bowstring which he had used for many long years.
The iron arrows shot from the bow of that foremost of Rakshasas, resembling in hue and effulgence the rays of the sun and furnished with wings made of gold and discharged like lightnings fell on the sky.
Both of them were highly delighted, both possessed great strength; and each was desirous of seizing the other's weakness.
The childless man gets a son and the poor one riches by reading this. It purges all sins, even if it is read with only his foot on it.
Those damsels, who had been dragged forcibly into the woods by those Rākşasīs and kept in separate places for many days, were brought back by their husbands with grief.
There is not even the minutest part of her person that does not wear beauty. And where-ever she casts her eyes, they never fail in their object.
0 ruler of earth, laughing all the while he cut in twain that fierce looking warrior as soon as saw him rush towards himself.
And the chariots of Karna and Arjuna, like those of Saudamani (Rama), were decked with gold, gems, pearls and jewels.
When your army had entered, Satyavikrama (Arjuna) with the son of Shini at their head and Bhimasena as their leader encountered that division of yours.
The person who hears this excellent discourse on Savitri, becomes happy and successful in all his objects. He never suffers from misery.
The son of Gritsamada was a Brahmana, named Suceta; and Vihavya was the son of Sutajasa.
Thereupon the best of all creatures, Govinda with Dharma's son and other Vrishni heroes led by Baladeva advanced against Satyaki.
As meat is devoured in the sky by birds and beasts on earth, so my wealth will be enjoyed everywhere.
I hear that in this sacred asylum, Vashishtha's son was born. In it also was born the lord of wealth Kubera with a human body.
The five senses do not perceive all things; some say that it is Agni, others the lord of creatures, other again, the seasons and months and fortnights and days. Others call it morning or evening; another says mid-day; while yet a third calls it one instant. It has many names; know then what its nature really is which controls everything in this world.
Then, O Bharata, Bibhatsu was much comforted. He then returned from the abode of Yama like one that has gone on a journey and come back again after a long time.
Then the son of Shona, rushing into the Pandava army like a four-horned elephant, assailed Yudhishthira.
Dhritarashtra said : These kings, O Sanjaya who were in the van of Vrikodara (Bhima) and did not retreat from battle even at the commandment of celestials.
Then Arjuna slew with his sharp arrows four hundred heroic warriors, each endued with great strength and mighty car-warriors.
Thereupon, the son of Suta took up a fearful arrow blazing like fire and aimed it at the son of Pandu.
While he was thus hurrying towards the son of Subhadra, those mighty car-warriors wounded Kritavarman in that battle with numerous arrows.
The high-souled sons of Kunti, who had been born without being known by their mother and were also never slain (by any body) then at the instance of Vidura they left that place.
O ten-headed one, I am pleased with your heroism; and therefore shall you be called Rāvana from this day forth.
O king, you may see those elephants which are engaged in destroying the enemies and their horses; they appear like so many Gandharvas.
Pandu said O you of great piety, the gates of heaven are closed against those who have no children. For this reason I am burning in hell, and therefore do I tell you all that I know about it; I was formerly born as a Brahmana by virtue of my good deeds performed in previous lives.
Markandeya said : Having promised the Savitri, and having given vent to those words in her presence, he began again to pacify (the Rishi) with these words:-"Let it be so."
Why then did they not create other gods who were as powerful and energetic?
Now hear I shall tell you in detail the three characteristics of intelligence and firmness, according to their respective aspects. Dhananjaya is distinct from them all.
Men of enterprise never fail in their work. I shall therefore, relying upon my own energy alone and without waiting for any one's permission, attempt to obtain Janaka's daughter.
In the Bharata race there were many persons who, like goddesses in their energy and virtue. These men of highly exalted character became as Brahma himself; for all these heroes had names which cannot be measured or counted by any one. O descendant of the Bharatas I shall now relate you the story about those great men.
Stretching his bow, the powerful hero of immeasurable soul covered that son of Pandu with a shower of keen arrows.
Originally, this one form (of Brahman) originated as four forms. By virtue of his good deeds in a former birth he was born again and became the father of those who are virtuous by nature.
Then that best of monkeys, without reflecting for a moment took up the terrible mace and hurled it down on his breast in that mighty encounter.
I swear by my truth that, O you of the fairest complexion! do not grieve. Those men who had laughed at me when they saw you in disguise as a man will now be devoured by wolves and jackals.'
That Raksasa, out of anger and pride for being a young hero among monkeys, began to frighten the monkey-army as an enraged lion terrifies a herd of deer.
His attendants sprinkled him with water of the coldest kind, and fragrant as that used in performing religious rites.
Thereupon, Yudhishthira having heard the son of Madhu (Krishna), spoke thus in sweet accents to that one with lotus-like eyes.
My huge-eyed Janaki also, on account of her love for me, has been stricken with anxiety. If she is not deprived (of the sense by my enemies), may Madana over-come her."
The blood of the elephants, horses and men which were slain by those sharp arrows was drunk up with great pleasure by a number of jackals.
Rukmāngada and Rukmapuñkhara, the grandson of Shini (Arjuna) shot at Kritavarma eighty shafts out of his desire for seeing Dhananjaya. Then pierced with those arrows by that powerful enemy who was desirous of fighting him, that subduer of foes.
The hero who killed Ketumana, the son of king Drupada in battle and he was a very difficult one to be slain. Who could resist him at that time when Drona was not there?
By my pride have I been brought into this condition. O child, born in a family rich and powerful as mine is, I should be gifted with knowledge and intelligence; but being ignorant of them, I am always aware of these defects which are due to myself alone. Being angry at heart the animals tear each other's flesh. And it was by such conduct that I came to my present state, like one whose oil has evaporated or like a bee whose honey-sac is empty. Behold me rushing along furiously intoxicated with anger! This sinful man who lives in his hermitage, O king, having given up all attachments and engaged in learning the Vedas by recitation from mouth to ear, is carried away by persons desirous of acquiring wealth by unfair means.
Uttanka said I am always pleased with you, O best of men. Therefore have I come here for begging alms from you who are adorned with earrings set in gems and pearls.
And, O Shalmali, you will again be protected by me as before. Indeed, your being covered with wind and water is a certain protection for you in the present circumstances.
Sanatsujata said I shall now describe the ancient and unmanifest knowledge which is gained by devotion, through Brahmacharya. He who attains that knowledge gives up this world of mortals after acquiring it from his preceptor or old men.
Then, O king, those two unitedly began the destruction of all sorts of objects which are destructive.
Vaishampayana said : Thus praised by the king, that giver of light and life to all creatures (the sun) became pleased with him. And he then showed himself in his own true form as effulgent as fire itself when it blazes forth for burning up a forest.
Hanumān, learned in all the scriptures and ever ready for his master's service was anxious about Angada.
And their counsellors, Marica, Shuka and Ravana's son Aparjita along with Prahasta, being routed by that one resembling a deer fled away.
He should make an arrow of grass and sleep on the ground like a wild animal; he should use various devices for getting over his enemies.
Vidura said O king, the three-fold objects of life are based on righteousness. The kingdom also is dependent upon it; they say that all things in this world depend upon virtue. O monarch, when you are engaged in virtue do your best and protect with the help of your power all these sons of Pandu as well as those of yours (Bhishma).
All the celestials weapons, O Bharata are in your hands. No human being can defeat you on earth.
Seeing the maiden, whose body was afflicted with the bite of a snake and who had been weeping along with her son. The dwellers in the forest were greatly distressed for pity; Ruru's heart also became very sorry on seeing his daughter thus bitten by a serpent. All those best among Brahmanas sat down there at that time.
He is followed by the wind, which shakes with its six steps (i.e. with all his might) the trees of various kinds and flowers having beautiful branches.
Having heard those words, spoken by Arjuna out of desire for wealth and worldly objects Kunti began to sigh heavily with her mind stricken with grief.
Then the lord, Yudhishthira, having been saluted by Draupadi and gone into a chamber in that palace began to make arrangements for his meal.
The sound that he made, in the face of his enemies was very loud like that Garuda makes when fighting with snakes.
Having been thus addressed, and having bowed his head with folded hands, Laksmana spoke in reply, showing thereby that he was as much pleased (with the prospect of Rāma's speedy departure) as himself.
Formerly, the earth conquered by Arjuna has been stolen from him through covetousness and given away to those who were not worthy of it. Take back that prosperity which belongs to Yudhishthira (from Duryodhana).
O Brahmana, my father has gone to the region of departed manes. How is it that you have seen him today in such a state?
Who is there who will be able in battle, to fight with Karna the son of Radha other than Rama or Drona or Arjuna himself?
Then that eldest son of Brihaspati, Bharadvaja, the learned and virtuous priest addressed king Divodasa thus:-“Tell me O lord why you have come here. Tell all; I will do what is agreeable to you.”
We could not see there the standard, nor Arjuna's car and Keshava himself covered with that fearful shower of arrows.
You have been brought back from the abode of Indra by your son, accompanied with Lakşmaņa. Therefore salute him."
The sons of Draupadi, all heroes equal in strength and beauty with their fathers sat down on excellent seats decked with gold.
The long-armed Bhimasena, wearing armour and ear-rings, appeared very cheerful in consequence of the favourable winds.
My relatives have been honoured; the people are under my control and I am adored by all. What man is there more fortunate than myself? O king, having made a good choice of friends, I have acquired honour which is difficult to get in this world!
These Chuta trees, O Laksmana, decked with flowers appear like men who are full of anxiety and fear.
Then those two chastisers of foes, having rested for a while again and taking up their respective maces with great force, once more rushed against one another.
Kripa, the great car-warrior Shaibya, Shakuni of Sindhu race and Sudakshina also from Kamboja.
Then entering the inner apartment Vrikodara began fighting with Virata, who was surrounded by many strong lions and tigers.
He who was self-controlled, abstemious in his diet and speech, grateful towards all the trees on which he lived; but whose religion had become weak.
They, who are engaged in the gratification of their desires and pleasures by means of wealth and enjoyments, consider only this life as real.
Your former servants will not be able to bear my conduct. They shall break you down in my presence, for they are all of vicious dispositions.
O king, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya (Arjuna) encountered in that battle many of the Kaurava troops clothed with Kangala armour shot by Drona.
In the same way, O king, soldiers and kings follow those who are their leaders. The sound of their arms when they march forward resembles that made by a storm in the sky.
Sanjaya said “The king of the Sindhus (Jayadratha) has been slain and he will not be able to come out alive from there.
Arrived at that difficult path, he shone in the midst of those assembled there. Like fire consuming all creatures on a universal conflagration at the end of Yuga.
Then, having been permitted by him with a delighted heart and that destroyer of Bala's force, went up speedily into the sky.
Horses without horses, elephants without elephant riders and madly caroused troops of charioteers, all met together there.
The Kshatriyas, again, were born with three heads or seven and ten. Thousands of these terrible and fierce-appearing Kshatriya spirits, burning in the shape of fire and armed with poisonous snakes for arms were offered up as oblations.
O king, hundreds and thousands of their arms severed with Bhallas were seen on the ground covered with blood as if they had been cut off.
The high-souled saints, desirous of seeing the battle, arrived there. The Rishis and celestial Gandharvas with Siddhas came together accompanied by Charanas.
He then fought with Karna in all sorts of illusion and lightness. The arrows that he shot were not seen by the eye, as they fell on the foe like a shower of clouds from heaven.
The highly effulgent Kirmeera, the friend of Hidimba (Bhima) remembered for a long time past his old enmity with that wicked son of Kunti.
Then the celestials, having gone round all the worlds and returned from them, went back to Varuna. And then they said to him in these words-As we have seen that Shakra (Indra) had saved us on every occasion of danger!
If I am slain, even the illustrious Krishna will regard me so. From myself there is no cause for blame; do you therefore guide and direct me.”
O descendant of the Vrishni race, at the beginning of a Yuga from an embryo that was produced in my navel. He who is our spiritual preceptor and instructor on all subjects including this entire universe, Brahma himself, has been born as your son (Krishna).
That slayer of Madhu, the lord of all gods, who has been worshipped by many sacrifices; that Krishna whose energy is great and who dwelt in Caitraratha forest.
Then the righteous Lakşmaņa, having searched many means for slaying Kumbhakarna spoke thus in a proper season.
Though protected by Savyasachin, the Magadha prince thought that he could not escape from death and therefore hurled his arrows.
Like a huge elephant enraged at the sound of any weapon, that long-armed one pierced Kritavarman with eight arrows shot from his powerful bow.
Savitri said : O king, I am satisfied with your chastity, purity and self-control.
O Suyodhana, give back the five brothers their bodies; and in return take with you these five villages. Let there be peace between us, o great intellected one together with your kinsmen and relatives."
In the midst of a man's heart there is one receptacle which is called mind. That contains all his wishes and intentions, as also his semen or vital seed (of life).
O child, during the reign of that high-souled one who had conquered all his enemies and was engaged in governing his subjects according to righteousness, there was born a virtuous son named Sharyati.
The Shurasenas, the Abhisahas and many others followed those ten thousand car-warriors of that party.
And having thus spoken, he addressed the king of snakes with suitable words and said,-That wicked-minded Takshaka who has killed my father.
Show me all the energy which you possess besides this. The son of Prishata will then be able to kill Drona and your pride too, O Parshata (will vanish).
Hearing those words of his ministers, the king began to think thus:-“What is this that Destiny has brought about?
O king, the virtuous-minded Rāma did not consent when Sītā besought him to go back; and he then spoke thus in grief,
The sound of conchs, cymbals and trumpets as well as the roars of lions were heard.
Tell us, O king of the Kurus what we shall do; for we are ready with bent heads to carry out your commands. We will all willingly serve you."
Remembering their children and wives, they shall become always miserable and hungry. They shall grieve in great sorrow for you when lying on beds of pain!
War is the destruction of Kshatriyas and the cause also for taking possession of other people's kingdoms. What else than this serves as an excuse in a war which brings about one's own ruin?
Those who perform sacrifices with the desire of acquiring heaven, which is attainable by means of gifts and penances, are said to be performing sinful acts. The performance of sacrifice for the sake of enjoying celestial happiness in after life is also regarded as a sin. Those that celebrate Sacrifices with the object of getting fruits here or hereafter do not acquire any merit from them.
I shall do that which you desire of me. O Brahmanas, let this be done by us together; even what we have heard from the snake is well known to you all! Let Takshaka and his friends with myself cast into fire, as my father was formerly burnt up in a pool of venomous matter.
Now Drona, on a sudden feeling pleasure in the battle, has taken up the son of Pandu and is now sure to come against us.
Let that great fear of you be dispelled in this mighty battle; I will kill him (Duryodhana). O king, do not grieve.
The grandfathers, wishing for sons, give them. You know what the Pitris are; do you now understand why they thus bestow a son on their descendants?
He saw (that) standard bearing the device of an elephant with a hook, and made of gold set with pearls and diamonds. It was beautiful as it had been painted by excellent artists who were experts in drawing pictures on sheets of metal which they heated at high temperatures.
While the water on which their feet have been washed remains in that place, do you pour libations of clarified butter for your departed manes with a leaf from this lotus.
Hearing this voice from the woods, my beloved sister residing in her retreat was highly delighted and said.
Be comforted, and cheerfully relate all that has happened. My bow is not yet drawn back; the weapon I have created for you has been discharged and your enemy destroyed.
You have told me what are the desires that men wish for. And those streams of water, flowing from which Madhu is produced, should be considered as producing Kama-rasa (lust).
Narada said : O God of gods, the lord and master of all beings! You are a refuge for all living creatures. I have heard what he has told me about you.
To kill you all who are wicked and of sinful deeds. I am come here with bow in hand at the command of those Rishis,
They are ever engaged in the performance of acts which may be considered as good. Indeed, always following virtue they have been able to escape from all great dangers by relying upon their wisdom and intelligence. O foremost one among twice-born ones! I see that many highly virtuous persons amongst men perform very sinful deeds on account of contact with various objects in this world
That man, who in battle defeats Arjuna and also the gods of heaven by his two arms, will dig up this earth with them and burn it.
Just as was the case with Dasaratha, so is this city of Ayodhyā under my sway. You have no doubt about your right and therefore you ought to do what is proper (to me).
O Keshava, the Satvata tribe has all those virtues (namely) truthfulness, firmness of purpose and energy.
Thereupon, that mighty car-warrior, the descendant of Satvata (Kshatriya) named Sikhandin got worked up with rage and smilingly cut off in battle Arjuna's bow as if he was a mere grass.
Then Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata, waxing worth, surrounded him on all sides with their four kinds of forces.
Do you establish a city there for the high-souled Angada, called Chandraketa and having its gateways resembling moonbeams.
I shall not be released from this curse unless with my feet touching the ground and being smeared over by a woman, these locks of hair are taken up.
What is the truth, O beautiful lady? And what are falsehoods? Tell me all this. Hearing your words of good omen I shall do as you direct."
Then Kalira also attacked the Daityas and Danavas. The Danavas, who had been afflicted by that god of wealth (Kubera), were killed by him in battle;
Then that mighty car-warrior, O king, slew in battle hundreds and thousands of elephants, chariots and horses.
O Rāghava, that wicked one also exerted himself for my destruction; and a large number of monkeys were killed by me.
The Sadhyas said What is the divinity of Brahmanas? And what do they say about their own goodness and wickedness, as also concerning man's opinion on these points.
Vidura, that foremost of all men gifted with intelligence and ever engaged in the service of his friends, informed Dharmaraja Yudhishthira of everything connected with the Pandavas. The scion of Dashara race described every thing as he had seen it himself.
And the counsellors do not approve of any course which does not bring about peace. Considering all this, O son of Pritha, war is unsuitable for us.
O Partha, I shall make the assembled celestials and Indra himself fly with my arrows. With them also will go Rakshasas and Asuras and men and Nagas (serpents).
The Brahmanas, having been adored by the king and worshipped him in return, went away. And the son of Pandu (Yudhishthira), accompanied with his friends was filled with joy;
I am not doing anything wrong. They will see that especially for me, and they may say "He is afraid of Phalguna (Arjuna) when he comes here".
Seeing his brother slain and lying on the ground, conquered in battle by Rāma, Vibhīşaņa possessed of a soul smitten with grief began thus bewailing.
You are making the earth look like a field full of kine and you alone do everything for the benefit of three worlds.
Day and night, O Suta, I do not obtain a moment's peace of mind. Thinking over that dreadful game which had been played at dice,
O hero, having bound you I have acted properly. The Rakshasas cannot overcome one who is tied up in fetters. Having cut these bonds and escaped from them again, I shall slay this foe of mine once more."
When a king divides his kingdom among many and eats them up, then he becomes the strongest. This is called virtue in kingship
Alas, O son! alas, my dear friend and companion! Alas life is gone from this excellent body of yours. You have been killed by various kinds of Rakshashis who are all uttering these dreadful words in unison.
And when the king (Rāma) of auspicious virtues was born, Kausalya lay prostrate on earth. Then those ladies looked upon her like a widow who has lost her husband, or an elephant that is bereft of its rider.* *The commentator says that they were astonished at seeing Kaushalya lying down on ground, as elephants lie down for rest in their stables; and also because she had fallen from heaven into this world, like an elephant falling off his back, while he is being taken up by ropes attached to different parts of his body.
How will the vital airs support in their own bodies without being seen by king Yudhishthira, the high-souled eldest son of Pandu?
Having said this, the descendant of Raghu thus spoke to Hanuman. "Having formed a resolution (about your life), do not speak falsely." "O lord of monkeys, as long as my words will be heard in the world shall I live here on earth, obeying all you say.” Thus accosted by that high-souled one Rāma, Hanumān communicated his own determination and rejoiced greatly at heart.
Thereupon the diadem-decked (Arjuna) with his arms raised high, twanged that bow and then sent forth a loud war-cry.
That which none of the great Rishis did in days gone by, I will show you today as the fruit of my asceticism.
The Pandavas, who were fatigued and whose hunger and thirst had been appeased by the cold shade of a tree in that dense forest.
I do not see, O delighter of the Kurus, any means by which they may be avenged. All those men have gone before us, killed with weapons in hand!
Menaka, herself the daughter of a celestials and also an attendant of Indra (the king of heaven), desired to see me in my own form.
Sauti said : A wonderful and innumerable host of blazing heroes, adorned with golden helmets, was seen advancing on the field.
Beholding the charming earth with its trees and other plants, that beautiful lady wandered about in company of her friends.
Vaishampayana said : O great king, the charioteers and all those people (in his army) who were returning with him began to eulogise that highly powerful one.
Behold this clear sky studded with stars, and as beautiful as the celestial firmament.
Thus speaking, he quickly proceeded towards the charioteer, saying “Drive on" and "Come". Seeing him advancing thus with his eyes red in anger.
Thereupon going from the Rksyamuka mountain, Hanumān related all this to the heroic and powerful king of monkeys.
Behold them falling like clouds torn apart by the wind. As your younger brother has destroyed my kingdom, so have I with his help made all these trees fall down.”
O son of Bharata, having renounced his burden the mad bee has gone away. I can not now bear this sacrifice (of Yudhishthira).
Drawing their bows of the size of palm trees, those highly powerful heroes surrounded Arjuna with a shower of arrows.
Vaishampayana said Hearing these words of Dharmaraja, the destroyer of Madhu thus spoke to Satyaki who stood near him. “Let my car be yoked."
O Yudhishthira, having saluted the son of Ganga and Bhima of dreadful prowess and then embraced them go up to him (Draupadi) and ask what is in your mind.
The sun has the five qualities of heat, cookery, light, sight and knowledge. His form is like that of copper or silver or gold.
Having slain many thousands of lions, tigers and deer he every day takes the food which is necessary for a human being.
The Rishi said : O Kshatriya, as you are born in the race of your father and mother so by virtue of birth or through your superior knowledge (of religion) it is natural that you should speak like a Kshatriya.
By performing Shraddha at the time of copulation, one begets wise and virtuous sons. The son begotten by a man who performs Shraddhas in honour of his kinsmen on Magha (the sixth month) is superior even among all his children.
Having been desirous of fighting, your enemies approached you from all sides. They were dreadful and well-versed in the use of arms; they also uttered terrible cries.
This town is not very far from this forest. Let us look at it; I shall keep awake while they are sleeping, and myself will sleep when these wearied ones have drunk water." Thinking thus Bhima awoke by himself that night.
Kashyapa said : He who steals your Pushkara, becomes guilty of all sorts of misdeeds in this world and is sure to be visited with the curse that he shall have no offspring.
Then the king Yudhishthira, Bhimasena of Pandu's race and Nakula Sahadeva both sons born of Madri.
The man who will worship him when he is burning in beauty, when he is shining with prosperity and when he is surrounded by friends shall be praised indeed.
I shall pass the time on this auspicious bank of the river Gomati, observing controlled diet as directed by you.
By his prowess he dries up the ocean and does other wonderful feats. In this work which is so opposed by monkeys, what seems good for the city as well as our army should be decided upon in consultation with you all.”
Both those heroes, O monarch, began to strike one another with their arrows. Their eyes reddened in rage and they twanged their bows.
I saw the sacred Tirtha of Prabhas, which is worthy of being seen by persons of pious character. O Krishna having great energy, you remained there for one thousand years and practised penances with only your feet fixed in that place. Vyasa said to me "you practise those observances out of regard to mankind".
Yudhishthira said O best of speakers, we have heard that in the beginning there was a great and terrible destruction at the time when everything had come into existence.
I do not regard it as wonderful that, in order to save them from destruction and being unable himself to rescue the Kurus.
A certain Brahmana, while living in a great cell (for his religious observances), at last came upon the other side of that deep and difficult forest filled with carnivorous animals.
Then giving up the sun, he cast his eyes on Rāhu and came back desirous of capturing Sīnghikas son.
You did not renounce your son, who was an obstacle in the way of your family and yourself; you are therefore now suffering from repentance.
Kunti said O you who are well-versed in the Vedas, all that I have done has been properly accomplished by you. My father also and other learned Brahmanas have approved of it;
O son of Daruka, come back by the car. It is not proper for you in any way or at all times to do such an act as this (i.e., fight with your enemies).
Vidura was the only one who knew what should be given and taken. Duryodhana took all that belonged in his share as a present from Dhritarashtra,
O descendant of Bharata, knowing that these have all been worn out by Time and are about to be destroyed do not grieve for them.
For the sake of wealth, or for love's sake, and even if it is done by my own speech (I have committed a sin); having thus got riches I have shared them with others. Now that these roots are planted in other families which were previously empty, they cannot be uprooted by you as easily as one would pluck fruit from a tree;
The man who makes a gift of Vasundhara (earth) becomes adored by all, for those persons whose desires are satisfied follow the giver.
I am suspicious and afraid of you, who are acquainted with the devices (of others) as also hard to please; this is an exceedingly deceitful piece of work.
The sages say that there are many forms of Brahma, viz., the Eternal and Unmanifest form; also twenty-five other forms. Two only should be considered by you as one.
The arrows, having been discharged from that bow never ceased coming back. Then I bowed down my head to Gautama of pure conduct and saluted him with great respect.
Thus spoken by me, O king, the royal sage Vishvavasu said-"O best of Brahmanas, do you tell us what question has been asked here.
Bhima then addressed her thus, “I will not fight with you; I shall only kill this (your) brother who has come here.”
O you of excellent vows, I have seen no fault in you. (I am) pleased with you; ask for what you desire to obtain, O Govinda!
Having made all those weapons, endued with wonderful and terrific effects, useless, the arrow, blazing forth like fire took up that helmet of Atikaya, decked in gold, from his head.
Yudhishthira, Bhima and the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), as also Krishna with his other brothers were all greatly pleased at this. Then Satyaki thus spoke to them
Thereupon the illustrious Wind god carried away with him those hosts of Samsaptakas together with their horses, elephants and cars.
Beholding him thus, of great ascetic merit and burning with splendour as it were from the lustre of his own prosperity, he was seized with wonder exceeding all measure.
Saying this, that terrible Rakshasa with red eyes and fierce prowess flew up into the sky.
When the king had entered into that silence, again a Rakshasa with Arvaka's body said thus.
These sons of Drupada, led by Dhrishtadyumna and the heroes Satyajit and Sini are all living in their respective camps.
That which is called the world of misery, and that which consists in this great round of births; all those are only different names for the forest or desert.
O virtuous lady, hear me as I tell you the six kinds of sons that are considered as having no relation with their fathers and grandfathers.
Seeing her, Nahusha smiled and said “Welcome you beautiful damsel! What shall I do for you? O amiable lady.
Being greatly excited with the sound of breathing, that one endued with great strength began to blaze like fire or the burning element.
Many other highly fortunate and powerful kings, Andhakas and Vrishnis ever ready with their forces.
Deluded by the desire of getting wealth, you are only engaged in eating. You do not see that three evils (viz., poverty, disease and death) attend upon every enjoyment which is obtained through acquisition of riches.
While they were thus talking, the highly powerful Bhima of dreadful deeds quickly returned with his army.
Brahman, Shanaishchara (Saturn), Manu Daksha Bhrigu Dharma Tapas and Yama; Marichi Angira Atri Pulastya Pulaha Kratu Vashistha Parameshthi Vasava Soma Kardma Ekavinsati these are the Prajapatis. Having adored their eternal limits as they are in every way worthy of worship.
There where the helpless and lamenting wives of Pandu, surrounded by Shikhandin, thus spoke.
Vaishampayana said : Having spoken thus, Dhritarashtra the son of Ambika joined his hands and spoke these words to king Yudhishthira who was trembling with fear. "I wish you would persuade Sanjaya that foremost among men as also Kripa that great car-warrior."
I swear by truth that you shall be the queen of kings. The sky may fall, or Himavat may melt into water; and the earth turn into ashes; and O Krishna, even this ocean of milk dry up but my word will not prove fruitless." Having heard these words of Arjuna's son (Bhima), Draupadi cast her eyes on her middle husband,
O undeteriorating one, I believe what you say; and further from the unmanifested, my intelligence has been inspired.
This world shall, in the next age, be quite reversed. People will adore pigs and neglect the gods.
Having entered the inner apartments and saluted all the deities, that effulgent one adored them with jewels and garlands of perfumes.
O Arjuna, there is another sin of the Kshatriyas that you have not heard. It is this: a Kshatriya should either kill or be killed by his enemies.
Then on the second day, a tremendous uproar arose among the Kurus.
O Rāma, those who for a moment have seen you are purified and made equal with the celestials. You should be adored by Indra himself as well as other lords of heaven.
The sky, covered with the rays of the setting Sun and looking like a lotus leaf, appeared as if intoxicated by Cupid.
Thus addressed, the king of Magadha began to strike Pandu's son with a shower of arrows as one looking at stars innumerable looks upon a cloud.
That animal which, O king, entering a tree with holes and branches in it (that is used as the entrance), begins to eat up its leaves from head downwards, is called Sandvarta.
Another is the fish, and there are said to be other aquatic animals. But though in contact with water a fish does not get wet through all its body.
O king, I have seen many learned men. They have spoken of the virtues and accomplishments of that brave man Shauri (Arjuna). There were many great persons present there who greatly admired him; they also described his various deeds from childhood up to this day. It was not merely we who had come here for seeing Janardana;
O best of kings, in the morning I shall tell you what is doubtful. The twilight has now arrived."
When the enemy's arrows are cut-off by his own weapon, when he is killed with that same weapon and when both Kshatriya and Brahmana get angry at him then does your enemies' wealth disappear.
Having been thus addressed, the Dasharha (Rama) caused his chariot to be turned back by which Trigarta's king had summoned Pandu's son.
The son of Madri (Sahadeva) was then greatly enraged and he took up a sword, shield and arrows. Karna laughed at him as the latter covered his body with these weapons.
Fire is the soul, and mother and father are his begetters. And a superior person acts as the preceptor of others by giving them proper instructions according to their capabilities, O foremost of men.
Like a thousand moons at the time of an eclipse, O Krishna, Karna's head fell on earth with its crest adorned with a hundred diadems.
Then the tender damsel, pleased with her husband's order and gratified by his affectionate treatment of herself began to praise that mighty monkey.
The illustrious son of the Panchala king, Dhrishtadyumna, endued with great splendour and having a bow for his chief weapon and subjugator of foes.
One who always conquers in battle and acquires wealth, is purged of all his sins and goes up the sun (heaven).
He, who does not consider his son as worthy of being loved by him when he has begotten one for himself, the celestials deprive him off prosperity and he is doomed never to enjoy any region in heaven.
And vultures and eagles, jackals and crows and Kankas in company with Bakas (cranes), meet on the summits of trees.
That man who having given a Shraddha and partaken of the offerings, goes away with his wife in his company is seen by the Pitris as living within their own bodies.
When my son Duryodhana, who is bent upon destroying the sons of Pandu, was being assailed by Bhimasena in wrathful mood what men stood before him?
Then, O king Karna pierced Bhima in return with nine shafts. He then cut down the latter's standard with one whetted arrow of great sharpness.
Five are the causes of acts, viz., a man commences an act in consequence of his body or mind or both. Whether it be righteous or unrighteous (the act) has its origin in those five.
Jarita said This terrible and fearful fire, burning the belly of man, is coming. It will burn up all creatures. Therefore my grief increases!
The son of Pandu, smiling, pierced his adversary with a long shaft shot from the bow-string that looked like the sun himself.
Sanjaya said Listen, O king, as I describe the battle in which many heroes were killed by their enemies and also how they attained death.
And hearing my truth, do what you think proper. The way of virtue has ever been the means for me and that for obtaining wealth, as well as this bridge (of peace) is between myself and father.
They (the Yogins and the followers of Sankhya) are afraid of birth as well death. Therefore, O descendant of Kashyapa, they consider that there is no sixteenth life in this world which has come into existence from union with Nature. When he becomes a perfect being, then does the learned man who knows all things acquire knowledge of it. And when one acquires such knowledge, he need not take another body;
O foremost of men, long ago in days of yore Hiranyakashipu the son of Kashyapa assumed a form resembling that of Nara and fought with Vishnu.
Even the Himavat mountain, pierced with my mace-blow shall be rent asunder by me into a hundred thousand pieces.
O worshipful one, I have taken refuge in you for the attainment of my own good. I bow down with folded hands and humbly beg of you that you may tell me what it is (that will lead to) my salvation.'
Yayati said : He who lives in the forest should never covet a village. If he does, then by living in the forest his village is behind him (that is, it shall not be destroyed).
Indra said O exalted Rishi, with your favour I will slay by means of my thunderbolt that Asura who is very difficult to be slain.
He is the mighty lion, whose body was like that of a Shuka (peacock) and who had been destroying many lions.
The great god, having worshipped Sarasvati and gratified Sthanu at that place erected a Tirtha on the spot which is now known as Sthanutirtha.
O best of men, (O son), make up your mind. You will go with the celestials who went before Indra for companionship.
The mind of Bhima, which was not yet satiated with the sight (of those beautiful hills), went on at a very rapid speed towards Draupadi.
How can you, who wish to live in battle, defeat and conquer those two high-souled ones like the twins Yama, themselves being so accomplished as warriors.
Our kine are being taken away by the wretched and wicked sons of Pandu. They come into our country with violence.
The preceptor said : All this has been told by Brahman and it is observed in the conduct of that foremost of Rishis, namely Arjuna. Taking refuge in his knowledge of Vedas he tries to comprehend the true meaning (of all things).
Then having adored those best of twice-born ones, O king Rama joyfully gave away various kinds of raiments and ornaments and good food and drink.
O Vasudeva, you know the two reasons that have led me thus. Knowing them I spoke as I did (to Arjuna).
Thereupon Vāli, having the splendour of fire when it is lighted with wood, summoned a thousand sons and charioteers.
He who recites this hymn of the divine sage with a pure heart and subdued mind, succeeds in enjoying all his wishes.
(He was) the sorrow that increases grief of all those who have their hearts attached to them. As he stood before me, it seemed as if he were reproaching and ridiculing me with his words which had been carried away by the wind on leaves.
That which is not and yet exists, that of which the whole does exist; always prevented by two things I do not choose one over another.
Yudhishthira said O descendant of Bharata, by good luck you have acquired those celestial weapons from the king. By your own good fortune also that lord and ruler over all the celestials has been propitiated with us.
The fruit of a friend is his service; and the mark of an enemy is his mischief. Today I shall slay that thief who has carried away your wife."
Thinking of various things with her heart, she became very much depressed. She reflected on the strength and weakness of both parties, as also on what Brahma had said about her husband's words.
Then those foremost of warriors suddenly encompassed him on all sides. And as they rushed at him, he shattered them with Rudra's weapon.
In this Kali age, again I feel curiosity. What will be the result of so much confusion in religion?
A king, O monarch should not punish his servants so much that they may be unable to serve him again. By such punishment the subjects are killed; and if these die, their sons will also meet with death by similar treatment.
O highly blessed one, remove my fear; you ought, O Kākutstha, rid me of this (my) terror.
The wise men say that all acts done from desire are called Niyasa; and the renunciation of their fruits is termed Tyaga by learned persons.
The horse-coursers, O king, who had taken up their stations in the field and were standing with lances ready for use, now began to surround that foremost of steeds.
Keshini said : Does the son of Vrishni (Krishna) know where king Nala has gone? And how, O Bahuka, did he relate all this to you.
That best of kings then thus spoke to the Kurus who were sitting by him, "When shall we hold that great Rajasuya sacrifice which is also a Krtuva? When having killed all the Pandavas I will bring it back with me from every direction.
He, who pleases the celestials and the Pitris, Rishis (Auspicious spirits), Pramathas, Shri, Chitrangada, the elephants of all quarters, as also that which is called by the name of a gift made with knowledge. That man, O sinless one, becomes freed from every vice on account of those merits in him.
Then abandoning his mendicant form, that chastiser of foes-Hanuman-appeared in the shape of two logs and created a fire.
O king, the beauty of that high-souled son of Kunti was a source of grief for his enemies.
Seeing the king Vividha slain and his troops routed, Shalva, being borne on a chariot of air by Subhadra's son (Arjuna), returned.
Bhimasena said O descendant of Bharata, I am a gambler. The desire in my heart is that the king Virat shall come here before me and then (if possible) I will win him from him at dice!
No one could ask for her hand, who was like a lotus and whose eyes were as beautiful as the fire.
Remember that mighty sword which you gave, with a large quantity of butter and gold coins as present for Sahadeva. That sword is capable of bearing the weight of all objects in this world.
Thereupon, with twelve arrows he pierced Shikhandin; and then the king of Avanti struck Vasudana on his breast with a broad-headed shaft.
O best of the Bharata race, when those words were uttered by him all the Panchalas became highly agitated. Then Satyaki's son that mighty-armed one began to make a terrible noise (in reply).
The two mighty foes, both of whom were equally powerful and had met each other in battle like the proud mad elephants that fight with one another for their respective mates.
If, O best of Brahmanas, you wish me to renounce the world or take up my abode elsewhere; then these twice-born ones who have come here for your gratification should be pacified with words and gifts calculated to produce effect. Then I shall tell you what is really good for us both, O foremost of Twice born men. Or else if on account of any fault committed by myself you cast off this priesthood (of mine), others will officiate at sacrifices in our stead.
And as the immortals depend on Indra, so do we rely upon you. We desire victory in battle and everlasting happiness."
Then bowing down his head on the feet of Dharmaraja, and also saluting Bhima and Arjuna (and other) he placed himself behind Keshava.
The whole world was thus set on fire by my energy and in a moment the sky itself with all its quarters became lighted up.
I am exceedingly gratified and will destroy this hostile force which is like a mountain. Having destroyed it in the midst of battle, I shall be pleased with you today.
All these foremost of men, the Kurus and other kings spent that night in great happiness with their preceptors and relatives.
He, speaking of the sufferings which have befallen him on account of his love for the Pandavas and also of the virtuous practices that are observed by old men in our family.
Indra said : O foremost of virtuous men, what do you wish for? You desire to see the immeasurable and eternal Narayana. He is endowed with inexhaustible energy; he is that primeval god who has no beginning or end.
In the body of every animal there are five principal elements by which it moves about.
O king, some of the warriors began to void their bowels; and others began to pass urine. Some animals were cut with weapons by breaking off their bonds.
They dug many wells in dry regions, and they also constructed many tanks of various kinds.
Vishnu said : O you that are afflicted with the burden of earth, there is no cause for fear. I shall do this so that your weight may be reduced and thus (lightness) attained by you.
Thereupon Dharma's son again addressed the mighty-armed Bhima, saying,-The water of this river has been thoroughly boiled by that foremost hero among Vrishnis.
With weapons in our hands, with matted locks on heads and strings round the waist we shall all go together along with those foremost of Brahmanas who are ever engaged in austere penances.
I do not fear those dreadful and terrible omens. As Tara can hurl the stars from heaven, so shall I slay this brother of mine with my arrows. Being enraged at death by reason of my vow, I cannot tolerate Rāghava as well as Laksmana when he is possessed of such prowess."
O son of Kunti, the virtuous prince (Yudhishthira) then called in Satyaki who is as steady in his purpose as he himself. The wicked sons of Subala have been deprived of their virtue within this court and they are now engaged in a game with dice; therefore let us go there at once.”
You are furnished with all kinds of weapons, you have a bow in your hand and ride on the car. Display then your prowess by means of arrows or other weapons.'
As the fire, when applied with a chaff-cutter burns up wood and becomes visible in consequence of its burning; even so through Yoga is the Soul perceived within one's body.
The celestials, the ascetics and men all praise it. But none of them know what is in your mind for doing this deed (of Sita).
How, O sire, death comes in such a form when the virtuous man is engaged on his religious duties?
Leaving aside that great bow, Karna caught the Gandiva and began to shoot at him (Arjuna) from his chariot. But Arjuna too jumped down from it with ease on account of which he also got hold of the Gandiva; but as soon as this happened, both their cars were burnt up by the powerful weapon into ashes in an instant.
Having thus arranged that royal highway, crowded with men for the reception of his son-in-law (the Pandavas), he slowly began to proceed through it.
Thus the father, mother, sister-in-law and also his wife were all born of Sāvitrī in great distress.
And their eyes were reddened by anger, like the lotus leaf which has been dyed in dye.
And that foremost of car-warriors, the Rakshasa (Ravana), having a sun-like effulgence and riding on his chariot with its standard and flag-staff, covered the field in all directions. The ten cardinal points looked beautiful by means of arrows resembling rays from the Sun. His bow was like Indra's thunder-bolt; he had three eyes as large as moons or clouds; his body shone like gold.
Taking up another bow, that illustrious descendant of Shikhandin began to shower on the son of Hrishikesha a large number of arrows furnished with wings.
Then, O monarch, beholding the marvellous feats of Yuyudhana in battle Drona reflected thus within his mind.
Then, O Bharata, having slain Shukra's son on the field of battle, those Pandava warriors filled with joy blew their conches and thus highly delighted their soldiers who were all devoted followers of Keshava.
Seeing it rush on, he struck it with his clenched fist. Struck by that blow, the summit of the mountain began to tremble and crumbled down in pieces like a huge mass of clouds, its trees uprooted and falling on earth.
And the troops of Dhritarashtra, deprived of their senses and with faces pale as a sheet of paper (in fear), were then routed by Keshava's Gandiva-sound.
What will Arjuna do who having brought the horse here, had satisfied Agni (fire-god) and conquered Indra by means of one chariot; killed all the Rakshasas in the city of Panchala; taken away Vasuki's sister; is superior among those that fight for victory.
All the sons of Dhritarashtra, being struck with fear and running away in haste were followed by the son of Kunti (Yudhishthira) alongwith his large army.
Thereupon having soon recovered his senses, Vrikodara cleansed his face which was stained with blood. And then he restrained himself by the help of a little patience and opening wide his eyes stood there like one who has regained consciousness after swoon.
O son of Kuru, we should never strike a superior. This is the saying of our preceptor, that great one.
Krishna, however always protects his friends in battle. The second of you is Satyaki who also never gives up life on the field.
O king, the blood-stained Earth and that terrible fierce effulgence soon disappeared.
O king, let us not disparage other men; there is strength in a man. You are equal with others or perhaps even superior to them,
He who, under the influence of ignorance kills a tree in his own house, is as guilty (in the eyes of God) for this act as he would be if actually shed blood.
When a man, whether happy or unhappy, becomes wise and is able to distinguish good from evil he then begins to see that his actions are the fruits of Destiny.
And having vanquished the mighty host of Duryodhana with his foreknowledge, that foremost of men issued out into battle accompanied by ten thousand elephants and twenty thousand steeds, innumerable cars and foot-soldiers.
Sauti said : O best of men, the royal sage thus told me that Takshaka had been burnt up in a blazing fire.
I am speaking of you who are now engaged in your own proper duties, and whose soul is under control; but from heedlessness my words have slipped off the track like a chariot.
Having fought a battle for five days, that Brahmana of learning in the Vedas and having killed Drona's son went to heaven.
Thus did the monarchs, having their Svasti made and everything done that was necessary for acquiring sovereignty, set out for Varanavata.
Then cutting through my troops which were not in a compact state and who all wanted his welfare, he entered into them like the lion entering into an herds of kine.
The root of the enemy's party should be first destroyed; and then his allies, and those who stand next in rank.
And entering the charming city having gateways and colonnades like a palace, furnished with many chariots.
Hearing the roar of those animals, Yudhishthira said unto his brothers “We have come into a forest filled with deer and other animals.
O blessed lady, the deity that you will call by this Mantra shall be under your control.
Having seen this, the son of Pandu obtained his desire and thought in his mind with great delight about that beloved lady who had been suffering from so many hardships during her exile.
Having practised another severe austerities, he again performed very great penances and filled the interstice between heaven and earth with his energy.
I am sure, by your seeing us our prosperity will be secured. Your favour is the result of my own deeds.
He (Karna) quickly pierced the king with seven sharp arrows. But that light-handed one soon cut off his bow-string.
Thereupon having reduced those thousand shafts into ashes by means of that weapon, the heroes sent them all back (to their respective owners).
That foremost of kings, the son of Sini resembled a blazing flame in battle. He cut-off that best among men (Drona) resembling Indra himself and having rays on his head like those coming from the Sun-god with arrows having heads bright as fire-flies or lightning flashes.
My father-in-law and his followers were seated. But (that lady) like a she-cuckoo, began to weep for the absence of her lord.
O son of Sumitrā, I have dismissed you. Let there be no departure from virtue on your part. Renunciation and death are both ordained for virtuous men.
Dhristadyumna said I will kill Drona, Shikhandin will the grandsire (Bhishma), Bhimasena will slay Duryodhana and Arjuna will destroy Karna. Rama and Krishna being our protectors we are sure of defeating all those foes in battle; what need have we then for fear even if Indra himself were present with us?
The celestials said : O foremost of the twice-born, Vindhya king is now under the influence of his anger. He has assumed a gigantic form and wishes to consume Surya (sun), Chandra (moon) planets etc., he is able to stop them only you are superior to him in that respect so check this wrathful one from taking such an action.
The Rishis have said that you are forgiving and truthful. You were born from Truth, as Kashyapa has described.
The head of the king was again cut off by another broad-headed shaft furnished with a golden point and made entirely out of iron.
Look, various kinds of birds fly from every side with their beautiful plumage and musical notes.
It is not proper that a woman should give birth without knowing the father of her child. I am desirous, therefore, O daughter-in-law, to accomplish this act for which my fame will spread far and wide over all directions.
Those great Rishis, who were very much curious in hearing the stories of birth. And those celestials also that came there for seeing them (the Rakshasas), saw their army consisting of all those beings whose lives had been already taken away from them.
It has been said, O king that those who observe a partial fast are always happy. A man becomes purified by observing the vow of eating only milk and other things made from cow's milk; he acquires heaven in this life itself if he eats leaves for his food on the occasion of performing the ceremony called Shaka-Diksha (initiation).
Having heard the words of that Brahmana, Yudhishthira became greatly angry. The son of Kunti (Yudhisthithra) taking up his bow ran away with all his brothers towards the forest.
The father of that boy and other ascetics saw her, rolling on the ground like a lotus.
Having fixed those two in the mind, they then began to fix their vital airs.
The sky was filled with the arrows shot by Arjuna. He lost his senses and dropped down from the car, as also his bow Gandiva.
That boy resembling a god in embryo, grew up rapidly. When he was only six years old, Kanva took him near his hermitage and bound there lions and tigers, boars and buffaloes as well as elephants with powerful ropes.
The intelligent serpent, without speaking either 'well' or 'ill', continued in his place.
Then that descendant of Kuru, taking up a good and effulgent dart like the flaming rod of Death or fire. With its head sharpened by means of a whetstone, that dart was blazing like lightning in the sky and it looked beautiful as if drawn out of heaven itself; he hurled this weapon at his foe, but before reaching him it was cut into three pieces by Drona himself with his arrows.
Thereupon he, by exerting himself with great diligence and observing many kinds of penances, acquired effulgence resembling that of the Sun.
The destruction of the ant-hill is not so much a calamity as that it should be made into fuel. This being known, fire burning in air can do more good than doing injury by devouring the ants' nest;
The charming city of Śrāvastī is the abode of Lava. And having made Ayodhyă desolate, those two mighty car-warriors Rama and Bharata went up for heaven;
As if the wind was blowing at his bidding, Śatpada came and caught that sweet mango which had fallen down with a beautiful stem.
I was much surprised at seeing the new and firm palace of my brother. Indeed, from that day did I begin always in my mind to adore with great respect those twice-born ones who were engaged as servants by Rukmani's son (Krishna).
How did Dasaratha, born in a noble family and of righteous conduct come by this sinful act, knowing full well the difference between virtue and vice?
Indra said : O illustrious one, I did not steal this wonderful Pushkara out of covetousness. But the Rishi had asked me for it as a boon and therefore you should not punish me.
And then twenty-five mighty car-warriors, approved by Dhrishtadyumna and famous in the world were slain by him.
O king, the son of Drona (Ashvathama), Vikartana, Karna and Somadatta, Bahlika's son Shalva, ruler of Pragjyotisha Shalya, Jayadratha of Avanti; Dhushasana, Durmukha and Dusaha. Shrutayu Chitrasena Purumitra Vivingsati, Bhuri-shrava, your own son Vrikarnin, I have collected ten Akshauhinis, seven less than those of my enemies, why should not victory be mine?
Those men who are not yet fully grown, perform various works among themselves and when they have performed them inform others of their results.
And the high-souled Bhima, that foremost of all persons conversant with omen and auspicious moments, caused the tents to be pitched.
Hearing that call of yours, your highly powerful son immediately rushed at me like a mad elephant rushing against another.
If virtue be opposed by vice, the latter cannot be called virtuous. But if it is not so then what you say is true that righteousness and unrighteousness are in conflict with each other.
That prince of men rose up, and then went into his excellent bed-room for performing the usual morning rites.
The wise enjoy themselves in their last days. They do not seek enjoyment during the middle portion of life. People consider happiness as that which is attainable at death, and misery exists between birth and death.
O Bhimasena, you cannot penetrate into the hostile army like a fire in a forest. Today also having defeated me in battle you can not enter it as your enemy.
Thereupon jumping into that place, the powerful Brahman with all those celestials created there Tirthas and in proper order many deities.
Hearing these censures of his, Yudhishthira became exceedingly pleased; he thought Karna has been defeated in battle by Bhimasena.
They were duly examined in elephants and horses, chariots. Having been properly examined they received their pay according as the rules of service required.
The stars fell from the sky, and all directions became dark. And suddenly that dreadful darkness spread over the field of battle.
A king should never think that he has acquired enough virtue or wealth, and even his friendship is always dependent on the exercise of good sense.
Then worked up with anger, he sent at Suyodhana twenty-four shafts of exceeding sharpness and resembling the flames of fire or thunder-bolts.
He, who always protects the good and restrains the wicked is a king. By him has been established this entire universe."
Hearing these words of Rāma, the highly intelligent Bharata with joined hands said : O you that are conversant in speech, righteousness is higher than you; and the entire Earth depends on you. And o mighty-armed one, fame has taken refuge in you, O you having immeasurable prowess."
One should give the eyes, mind and speech. And one should speak sweet words; for rising up from his seat he should make other sit down on it, this is an eternal virtue. Rising again with respect, one should bow low before those who are seated in his presence or offer them worship by standing at a respectful distance. The Agnihotra (fire sacrifice), the Anuvashya, relatives, guests and friends as also sons wives servants, one should consume all these when they have been duly adored. Food which has not been properly cooked should never be eaten; nor may animals that have been killed uselessly be eaten. That food which one does not himself eat after having offered it to the gods according to ritualistic ordinances,
Yudhishthira though staying in the midst of his enemies, was desirous (of restoring peace) for love towards his kinsmen even as a weak man is desirous of regaining strength.
He went alone among the Kurus, and he poured libations on fire alone. And for five years did he lead a Brahmacharya life in solitude.
The fearful birds began to roar and the sun, whose rays were already visible became deprived of those rays.
Remain here contented; it is not proper for you who have renounced the world, to go back on your vow.
These wicked ones will have to go hence; and they shall sink into hell. This is the result of my sin, forsooth!
Having thus consoled the daughter of Videha, Hanuman-son of Maruta-determined in his mind that he should go and then bade farewell.
Arjuna had acquired a large number of clothes and various other articles in the inner apartments of the palace. He now began to sell them all, one by one, among his brothers, Pandavas.
Therefore, in this world and the next also, a man of virtuous soul is sure to acquire happiness.
Then king Dushyanta installed his son Shakuntala, under the name of Bharata as his heir-apparent.
A man looks like the moon when he holds a light in rainy days. He who gives away lights has no darkness of ignorance in him.
If the trunk of a tree be cut, all its branches die. How is it then that they do not wither when severed from their parent trunks?
The son of Ruru, named Shunaka, was a great ascetic. He had a son whose name also was Shaunaka.
Then that mighty and ever-destroyer of enemies, Ashvatthama, regaining his senses, twang the bowstring with a left hand.
You are the son of that one, therefore do not perform an act which your father would have disapproved. Do you renounce that course by which he has attained infamy in this world and is blamed as a fool (by all).
There arose a cool wind and the quarters became clear. I saw there an entire Akshauhini of soldiers slain,
That which the Lord of Beasts, when the end of a cycle approaches and all creatures are destroyed by him, places within himself (is what exists in me).
But urged by the mandate of Time, he forcibly tore out her teeth set with gems from her mouth.
The Pandavas said How did the wonderful birth of Krishna take place in the midst of a sacrificial fire, that was attended by Dhrishtadyumna and Drupada?
Why do you not run away, O Parshata's son? You seem now as if stupefied. Do you not see the fearful danger that has come upon us from Drona himself?
Vaishampayana said : Thus addressed, the king (Yudhishthira) recognised all this as true and adored Sharma's wife. He also gave away wealth in charity according to his duty.
Vaishampayana said : O king, in the Golden age (Krita) there lived an excellent Brahmana called Arstisena. He was always engaged in learning and the observance of religious rites.
Therefore, O king, Hari (Vishnu) is effulgent. Know that there are thousands of kings equal to him in strength and power.
I am always worthy of your favour, O goddess. You have given me birth and you are the friend whom I love."
O descendant of Raghu, I have taken these weapons and placed them in the cave. Do you take them back from me for examining their properties.'
Hearing these words of the king, Uchchaishrava said:-What colour is your complexion? Tell me soon.
By reading this narrative of the Ramayana, one acquires long life and fame in this world as well as in heaven.
Thereupon the high-souled Jamadagni's son, Jatayu bound by his promise (of not using weapons), hurled a dreadful weapon at Ravana. That blazing dart shot forth like lightning and spreading its energy over the entire universe,
O great king, Durmukha and Duryodhana and the young Durmarshana all rushed against him like so many huge elephants rushing towards each other.
And having met with the God of gods, viz., Vishnu who is born in a state of energy and whose power is immeasurable. Those greatly learned persons exceedingly agitated addressed him thus :
Twirling his mighty sword, adorned with gold and silver he hurled it at Kritavarma's chariot.
Having thus wounded the mighty car-warriors of Pandava army, Drona stood in that battle like Death himself.
Then the son of Subala with his standard, bow and umbrella broken by Sahadeva had been struck in many vital parts.
As a man, cutting wood and kindling fire, sees smoke and flame coming out of it in consequence thereof; so does the wise with his senses under control see that which is above him.
I have gained this sovereignty by virtue of my penances; and now that it is lost, through the fault of myself alone, therefore do I not grieve for it.
O auspicious one, I am therefore waiting for the time. Expecting the favour of Sugriva and his troops,
We have left the forest and put on deer-skins. And we are not worthy of such a condition as that which has been brought about by others in our case.
Neither in the Atharva nor Yajusha Samans, O king, nor in those highly pious and pure Samans that are found in the Rathantara or Bharhadra hymns is such a passage seen.
Sweet and musical, adorned with three measures of sweetness, seven kinds of metres, accompanied by the instruments of music; filled with eight sentiments, consisting of those that are agreeable, loveful, comic and terrible. Filled with heroic sentiments as well as other sorts of emotions like joy, sorrow or anger. Let them recite this poem which is composed in accordance with all these rules. Those two brothers who know everything about Gandharvas (music), who can produce various effects through their voice, who resemble two beautiful Gandharva living on earth-who are gifted with good looks, whose voices are sweet and whose words sound melodious like the notes produced from a flute, let both of them come here, having risen up just now from Rama's body.
Decked with garlands, and adorned with ear-rings and bracelets of gold; furnished with a Veena (lute) Vena, Mridanga (drum), Suras, Aivas and Ayamisa.
And although they were virtuous and obedient, yet touching his bed or any other of his belongings they did not find the least scent.
Narayana, the eternal Lord of men and in battle their protector as well. He is endued with divine attributes, he has a body that cannot be seen by any one;
Then he cut-off with his razor-edged sword the mighty bow of that hero, as also his vajra, (his shield), and his banner.
Today, O king have I destroyed your pride in battle. The vast kingdom of the Pandavas and their many misdeeds will be seen by you today.'
O great king, when the wicked were thus checked and killed by Yudhishthira in battle who was turning round on his chariot-wheels (i.e. he could turn any side of them towards the enemy) he then asked Phalguna about what should be done next
He is the Past, he is the Future and he also is the Present. O best of the Bharata race! That foremost of all those conversant with righteousness has taken refuge in my heart.
O foremost of the Kurus, if you do not renounce your eldest sister then I shall go away leaving her behind. A man who is powerful and has self-control should behave thus towards his wife.
Then the son of Karna, covered with arrows by the nephew of Sini and having his horses killed by those swift shafts discharged from bows drawn back to their ears, fell down like a dancer.
I shall gain eternal fame by giving up my body in battle; and having given away, according to the ordinance, all that is capable of being given away, and gained renown from victory over foes, I shall acquire only praise.
Having been thus crushed and killed, the monkeys were utterly destroyed. They then saw that cruel slaughter of men by a king who had no enemies.
Women should never be spoken of; they must not even be looked at. A king who is wise, must always keep away from them in case he has no need for their company.
That girl, who was like the red-hued waves of the Ocean and whose food consisted only of blood, embraced Mahāsena (Ganesha) as if he were her own child. And assuming a terrible form with a face resembling that of fire, eyes long and large as those of an antelope, and having many children she sported with the boy Ganeşa on mount Kailasa even as one plays with a ball in his hand.
Hearing these words of the intelligent Dharmaraja, he said-Do you go back; but they did not obey him.
The light is the form of Brahma, sound is his air and sky; touch is water which has the taste for all objects. All these are born from you. They exist in your body as also they move through it.
By the command of Bharadvāja, within a moment many rivers having their waters sweet as milk and capable of quenching thirst came up before Bharata.
Bhishma said The king of the Drupada, that lord of earth, by nature was afraid and also sinful; he has now met with a terrible calamity.
I think, the nights shall be long in my wakefulness. If Sītā is not found out by me and if she does not return with Răma and Laksmana, then will I wander through Janasthān and Manakini and all other places here.
Then without any weapons, desirous of preserving their lives and crying for help (from the Pandavas) they fled in all directions seeking your protection.
Utathya said The king is the protector of all creatures. He should not be a slave in order to satisfy his desire for pleasure and enjoyment, but he should rule as the guardian of duty (the fourfold objects).
Forgiveness is highly commended in the world; but no sinner deserves forgiveness. The sinful man who thinks that he has conquered one by forgiving him, is himself vanquished.
Then that illustrious and best of persons, that god who is the embodiment of every energy (of Nature) went to sleep in water.
Thereat, Tāră having said this in the presence of the lord of stars and planets (Rähu), Hanuman began to think that Angada had stolen his kingdom.
Yudhishthira said : O exalted one, I wish to hear the names of that high-souled personage who is celebrated in all three worlds.
Those old kings, who had come there for that assembly, saw the beautiful and highly prosperous city of Matsya's king. It was full of gems and other precious stones; it contained excellent streets with shops on both sides of them; it also abounded in every kind of perfumes.
Thereupon, worked up with rage the puissant son of Drona encountering Shikhandin severed him in twain with his sword.
Beholding this, your sons and soldiers O lord of earth were filled with joy; and again and again they uttered leonine roars.
O Brahmana, at this time the son of Menaka was born. He is known as Vishvavasu and he became the king among Gandharvas.
That Rākşasa, shrinking into the measure of an Angushtha (thumb), again rose up like a submarine mountain; and then began to range round in all directions.
Then that (hero) approaching the king who was fearlessly striking his foes with arrows, pierced him through and killed him; he then fell down from his chariot.
Now has come the time, as I told you before. Behold now those clouds resembling mountains cover the sky with their showers of rain!
Then that night-ranger, possessed of speed in wielding the bow and greatly enraged, discharged at the high-souled descendant of Raghu thousands of shafts.
O best of men, it is impossible for you to know this great secret which I have told. But one day you shall learn all about it."
The food that is taken in the three modes should be digested with a little of salt and cast on high places. After digesting it, one should retire into a secluded place which is called Parivrajya.
Therefore, O king, I said these harsh words to Drona's son who is a youth of good conduct and worthy of respect like a rough man.
Those two who were incapable of being described and those foremost among conquerors, began to fight with each other in great anger desirous only of defeating the other.
That great and intelligent prince Yuyutsu, O son, is the friend of Karna. Is not Suyodhana in his power?
Death is the ocean of all creatures. It is not well understood by men. Men, therefore, who are stupefied with ignorance and under its influence, suffer much misery in this world as they sink into it like water through a hole made on earth (by some person).
Then Satyaki of undeteriorating prowess began quickly piercing with many sharp arrows his adversary who was incapable being vanquished and who resembled a mountain shaken by an earthquake. And having fixed on the string three hundred golden-winged shafts,
Some make provision for a year's expenses, others do it for twelve years. They do this with the object of entertaining guests or for celebrating sacrifices and religious rites.
Then cutting off many arrows shot by Karna, he (Bhima) pierced his eldest son with eight shafts.
Vaishampayana said : O Bharata, thus addressed by his eldest brother, the son of Kunti touched him on all parts with affection.
That king, who gives a powerful horse for use in battle, is freed from all his sins and attains heaven.
Beholding Subhadra, the soldiers and citizens lamenting loudly ran towards Dwaraka.
O king of kings, if you leave me and go away I shall follow you; for this is what my own self says.
Thus adored by Dhritarashtra and thus commanded by the king, that chastiser of foes, endued with great fame went away.
And then, O king, the sky appeared without anything in it and all creatures were reduced into a state of utter insensibility.
Did Dhananjaya, with his shafts sharpened by the wind's own force and resembling arrows shot from a bow-string drawn back as far as possible, kill all those kings like so many frogs?
After a long time, king Yudhishthira of Kuru's race heard that the Vrishni and Andhaka races had been destroyed in an insurrection.
Let some of them, O king, be warm and let others be cool. And for the rest, a little water shall suffice as their drink."
The king who does not bear with his dear and beloved one, for the sinful acts that he commits either openly or in secret is said to be unrighteous.
Those two heroes covered with arrows, O king, looked exceedingly beautiful in the battle like a pair of Shalya deer.
Those chastisers of foes, delighted and exhilarated (by their success) roamed through your army. Your soldiers all stood up with Uttanka at the head of them.
He was as big as a huge Sala tree, and he shone like the rays of gold. And his nails were shining like silver or steel.
The Pandava is young, handsome and brave. He is gifted with great intelligence and skill; he is intelligent in war-fare as also true of prowess.
O descendant of Raghu, this is my supreme desire that you shall go away from the world without any grief.
O virtuous one, you shall attain to virtue on earth and great fame; Rāma has acquired heaven, excellent highness.
Vaishampayana said : The son of Kunti, the Pandava Dhananjaya (Arjuna) heard all these words which were spoken by that Brahmana with great respect.
O foremost of kings, if Keshava or Rama who is ever victorious in battle and the great car-warrior Pradyumna, with his mace, or Salya's son Sarana, or Samyukta along with the Vrishni race, will engage themselves for our sake on that most excellent frontiers of battle.
The virtuous and firm vowed Dharmaraja (Yama), your cousin, who is pure in conduct and of truthful promise will never kill you.
The king who considers duty as superior to wealth and thinks of the prosperity (of his kingdom), shines in virtue.
The Pitris said Welcome be you. Blessed are you! O best of those that move through the sky, hear what we say. You have asked a question which is very difficult to answer and which has been put by yourself in an indirect manner.
Shikhandin, Yuyudhana and the Prishata prince Dhrishtadyumna. Bhimasena (and) both of the twins Nakula and Sahadeva endued with great prowess.
Hearing these words of the celestials, that Brahmana went towards Vindhya. Coming up with him and his wife (in her presence) he thus spoke to the mountain.
With their bodies covered with dark clouds, wearing clothes made of deer-skins and sacred threads worn on the arm as a mark of initiation into learning, they looked like mountains in which wind was blowing.
When the citizens had gone, that king again with his ministers consulted about what should be done and then resolved on an act. The next day is Pushya; let my son Rama of lotus-like eyes become a prince today!
Hearing the same words of Baladeva's wise self, all those (Rakshasas) sat down again in their respective seats.
I have told you all that was related by the ascetics who came from Janasthana. O descendant of Raghu, what else do you wish to ask me?
Hearing that Dhrishtadyumna had been slain, those mighty car-warriors with their bows in their hands became filled with anxiety and the sons of Draupadi O king.
O best of kings, this your son has been adopted by you as a brother. Let the king be so who likes it."
All of them were mounted on cars, all had coats of mail and arms. They wore ear-rings and head-gears; they adorned themselves with bracelets made up of gold or other metals.
Thereupon Rāvana saw a golden car, like the second sun. And ascending a mountain in that forest he beheld Puspaka, which was at rest there on account of Rama's presence (in the city).
When he (Rāma) was speaking thus, Dushana saw a mighty car yoked with black horses belonging to the enemy.
The five, viz., the highly powerful heroes among men (the Pandavas), were all under Krishna's control.
Those who wish for their own good should kill those that attack them, even if they are sons or friends or brothers or fathers of theirs.
Your disease has said, “O holy one! O sinless man. It is not proper for you who are still a householder that you should retire into the forest."
Akritavrana said : The great ascetic Jamadagni was devotedly engaged in the study of Vedas. By his penances he succeeded in bringing under subjection all the celestials (including Indra).
O descendant of Bharata, in the course of time understanding and energy grow dim; they are then superseded by their opposites.
Thereupon, proceeding from there he reached the chastiser of Paka (Indra). And beholding Shri on Purandara's person, he sat down at his feet.
Indra said : You have been born of the Chandra, you shall not be able to obtain any wish that your heart may desire. Therefore do ask for some other object; and then will all your labour prove futile." Thus addressed by Shakra (Indra), Matsya was greatly afflicted with sorrow, he remained there sitting on his knee, stretching out a hundred fingers in length.
He is the foremost of all those that wield bows and are always protected by others, who has a controlled mind and who is ever obedient in doing what his wives wish.
O great mind, hear as I recite to you the eight hundred names of Dhaumya which were first uttered by that high-souled son of Pritha (Arjuna).
Ascending the sky with clouds like staircases, and wearing garlands of Kutaja flowers, may Surya be pleased.
And, having fixed a time for his destruction and the flesh of that desired deer which was cooked in every way, he himself brought it into the apartment of (the king).
O king, that one (Draupadi), stricken with fear and trembling all over her body got up on a car which was more swift than the former.
The sounds of the wind, fire and water reach up to fruits and flowers. Therefore trees also hear them with their ears.
Hearing the words of Vishvamitra in conformity with Vasishtha's advice, Janaka with joined hands said these words to those foremost of ascetics.
There were also twenty thousand Apsaras with their lord Gandharva Agnivarna, Narada and the twin Ashvinis in all his effulgence.
I shall go where the king of Sindhu, who is in a state of stupor, will be. With firm confidence you should obey the command of Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira).
Therefore, O foremost of twice-born persons, the unmanifest one having three qualities came into existence. The Unmanifest is that which becomes manifest at times and exists in its own form for all time without ever becoming exhausted or destroyed by any means.
It was surrounded on all sides with Sal, Tala and Ashva trees. Its spacious platform looked like a sacrificial altar covered over with grasses; its pillars were made of gold and they resembled the weapons of Sakra (Indra) in appearance as well as power. The golden armours worn by those brave warriors shining like lightning seemed beautiful as did their bows decked up with many strings of sinews resembling snakes and having excellent feathers fixed at their ends. Their faces shone brilliantly like that of blazing fire and so also did the rows of horses yoked to their cars. They appeared exceedingly handsome when adorned with ornaments made of pure silver or studded with pearls or gems or ornamented with precious stones set into ivory carvings on them. And Bharata saw there a huge and splendid Vedi for performing sacrifices built of gold which was spread out before his eyes in the abode of Rama and it appeared very holy just as if he had seen one in the house of an ascetic.
Then, O foremost of the Bharatas, wounded by that arrow which had penetrated through his mail and was impetuous like a tempest in its course, he fell down on earth as if struck with thunder-bolt.
Then that slayer of hostile heroes, the virtuous-souled son of Dharma, who was also fond of virtue and ever ready to do what is proper, thus spoke with joy, "Rising up you should all speedily attend to this matter for your father. You must all exert yourselves according to our ability.”
Vyadh, the physician of that righteous king (Yudhishthira), is living in this city. I shall go there today for asking his advice about religion and morality.
As the sun, dispelling darkness from heaven and emerging out of Rahu's mouth appears in full splendour so did Rama appear before his troops after destroying Kumbhakarna.
Hearing the words of Triſanku, who was inflamed with rage Rāma said these words to that hundred sons of sages. You have been rejected by your preceptor, a truthful and virtuous man; why then did you pass over his prohibition and come here?
After the destruction of that foremost one among Rākşasas, with his sons and councillors and friends, you shall meet with Rāma even as Rohini meets with the moon.
Do you come under my control with all your wealth and treasury. Save this city of Lankā, which is full of young children and old people.”
Then the king Hiranyavarman, O ruler of men, consulted with his ministers and they all agreed that he should send an ambassador (to Yudhishthira).
From his wings and from all sides came out warriors desirous of fighting, like clouds pouring rain.
There is no one in the world like you and there are none among Kshatriyas equal to you. O king, this your great doubt about your own self shows how powerful your intellect really is.
Those who are not virtuous, though they may seem like cupolas covered with grass in the guise of virtue. All their virtues and pious speech consist only of restraint; but self-restraint is extremely difficult for them.
There came the great god Mahadeva, Agni with Vayu and also Surya (Sun), Chandra (Moon) Shakra (Indra), Paramesthyas and Rishis. Vaikhanashas, Balakhilys, Vanaprasthas, Marichipas, Ajasa and Avimudha who were endued with asceticism in energy, came there; they all went to Brahman. Then those foremost of sages having been thus approached by them, related everything as it happened from beginning to end viz., how Sundi had carried off Urvi, what he did afterwards and when and how their return was effected. The gods headed by Brahma then ordered all these things for which that great assembly met together.
Having first fed the sacred fire with libations of clarified butter, and having duly worshipped him in a proper manner, that priest went round the altar reciting Mantras.
I shall go into the forest, which is inaccessible and inhabited by none but men; abounding in various animals and frequented by wolves.
"O wicked and mean-souled one, be obedient; forsooth the gods are propitious towards you and Yudhishthira does not act without our permission. For this reason do you still live! Proceeding there with your followers, Subala's son Karna and other friends of yours in a furious rage I shall send all of you to hell.” “What can now be done by me since king Yudhisthitha is pious and foremost among the Pandavas? He has been wronged but he did not get angry." Having said these words Vrikodara (Bhima), stretching his arms up high, began to sigh heavily like an extinguished fire.
If time does not come for me, I shall myself slay you with a clenched fist.
Vishoka said : O Bhima, why do you not hear this dreadful sound made by the twang of Gandiva string? It is being drawn out by Partha who has been greatly enraged. Are your two friends slain or wounded?
Thus thinking, the Magadha prince obeyed his own self and approaching him with folded palms adored him saying "be it so".
O Bhima, if you wish to release Suyodhana by means of conciliation; then do it in all ways. If the son of Gandhari does not yield himself to us with his own consent and through affection we should try to win him over with our prowess or mildness."
I suffer these and other calamities, because weak. Long have I been burning for the wicked deeds of sinful people.
When the six senses approach an object, their mind then becomes excited with desire.
In the fifth or sixth year a girl gives birth to children. Men, in that age of life are sure to beget sons on women who bear them from their tenth up to thirty years and sometimes even beyond this limit.
The destruction of the great Vasudeva will be like that of a river by which its waters have been sucked up. These heroes (the Pandavas) never believed in the death of Arjuna who is armed with Sarnga bow and whose arrow can not miss their aim.
Brihaspati has said that an army destitute of the three kinds of strength, cannot fight with any other force. My own army is possessed by these three qualities.
It was covered with bones and hair, infested with worms and insects. And all around it burned like a fire.
This, O Bharata is the highest good that I consider for you. Like your sons headed by Duryodhana those of Pandu's race are also certainly yours; and wise men should not entertain any ill feeling towards them in their hearts. But they do not, o king, see what will be beneficial to you (and) therefore fail to obtain what really suits themselves as well as yourself. For this reason, though inwardly dissatisfied with each other yet outwardly united together, they seek prosperity through your means without being able ever to attain it.
Another Rishi was adorned with the matted locks and decked out in a garland of Kusas. And some others had their bodies smeared over with mud, while there were many who bore on them baskets made of Kusa grass; as also those that carried loads of wood for offering oblations into fire at sacrifices.
I shall also do it as Arjuna, the son of Kunti will destroy the troops and army force of Dhritarashtra's son.
O you of great wisdom, hear as it is and then remain tranquil. I shall tell what will happen in the war that is coming on.”
The king of the Nishadas, who was living at Nimisha, sent presents (to Yudhishthira). He also adored Taraka.
When a great tree is born and grows, all creatures take shelter under it. But when the tree perishes or burns down, its inhabitants have no refuge left for them.
Some entered the caves and some went into the water-falls; others, stricken with fear at death, gave up their lives.
When the Brahmana is gratified, all the gods and Pitris are also satisfied. There is nothing superior for persons well-read in the scriptures than a Brahmana.
Vasava himself is incapable of vanquishing my army. I am invincible, and even the self-create Brahma cannot kill me.”
O foremost of men, as my preceptor's words are superior (to those said by any other person), so is your speech the best.
The Poet said : Let the thief, who takes away your cow and your Pushkara, strike you with his feet (in anger) and let him see his own reflection in the sun.
Then as the wind blows away a cloud or Vritra by means of Indra's thunder-bolt, so that best of horses was killed; and it fell down dead.
And other dreadful monkeys began fighting with the Rākşasas in great numbers, and also got at odds among themselves.
Having said this, all those men went away and the son of Drona thought for some time.
Then that best of kings, having arranged his forces for battle, resolved upon an attack on Drupada O descendant of the Bharata race.
Those wise men, who have no desire for the fruits of their actions and are free from anger, know that all acts should be performed according to the Vedas and other scriptures. The time, place, means as prescribed in those books must always be observed by them with perfect regularity; they must never do any act which is not conducive to religious merit or which produces hatred towards others; they shall follow only such duties as come naturally to them after a long course of practice; they will acquire tranquillity through their own natural conduct without having recourse to anything else than what belongs to nature herself; they will consider this present life also as being endless like heaven itself. They whose mind has been purified (by meditation) and who have subdued all sense objects find it difficult to perform even simple acts conforming to morality; therefore one should abstain from doing wicked deeds and practise virtue; there was neither distinction nor inequality among people belonging to different castes at that period when everything was good; then four classes were considered as equal.
Many excellent and beautiful houses, adorned with gems in the high roads. They were like full vessels of water when they began to tremble (with fear).
Beholding him thus afflicted with the calamity of hunger, all his friends and relatives belonging to Sumitra's family along with other well-wishers began to lament.
And he (the king) was like a lion, or an elephant, for the strength of his arms; and had the teeth of a tiger. He looked like a snake on account of his having the smell of musk in him. And again he resembled an ass for being hard-hearted towards others, and also resembling a horse for possessing great energy and power.
By acquiring an equilibrium of the qualities and by keeping up a pure mind, one should kill his body. When death approaches him he is freed from all bonds.
And they, having a strong arm for support and maddened by wine at night fall upon the Brahmanas. And those Kala-begotten ones kill many twice-born persons in their rage (against them).
If, O Karna, you give away this pair of beautiful earrings that are your own by birth, then having exhausted the span of life assigned to you, you shall become a victim of death.
The eyes of all the illustrious persons, with the exception of that great God called by the name of Brahman, fell on her person.
Where did I come from and where have you come from? Tell me this fully. How do creatures, O best of Brahmanas, become virtuous or sinful in the beginning but revert later to their original condition, how are they all alike at one time and again different (at other times), and why is it that those words which form part of Vedic literature as well as of worldly lore find such universal acceptance among men who understand them according to truth, ought you, therefore, explain these subjects to us.
Arjuna then, checking all their weapons with his own and piercing them on every side with well-directed shafts slew many of the Rakshasas.
Cutting off his bow, Falguni (Arjuna) with great force sent both of their arms and heads down on earth.
And Sikhandin, with arrows discharged from his bow-string resembling thunder-bolts or the peaks of mountains. Beholding those great car-warriors thus engaged in battle and showering on one another a rain of shafts, Bharadvaja's son sent up a loud roar; but that mighty roaring was for killing them (i.e., Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandin).
With six other planets, the sun will consume all things. The rivers and seas also shall rage in fury; and every part of the universe shall be on fire.
The Kauravas then, struck by Drona with his shafts, uttered cries like those of birds in a forest enveloped in smoke.
The sky became enveloped in a thick darkness and the points of compass were shrouded with it. And showers of meteors, like (pieces) of burning cloth fell on earth from heaven.
I have no doubt that in the matter of carrying a mace, there is none equal to Duryodhana. May you be blessed; for what you do now is also done by him (Shankarshana).
All of them then began to rain upon the son of Pandu numerous keen arrows. But what did those many tribes, who were all well-versed in battle and the use of weapons do?
The Shailikas said : If the carnivorous beasts and dogs attack us we shall not be able to come out of this forest.
Who is there among men and women that knows the merits and demerits of both sexes? What hero stood in battle before Yajnasena, who was possessed by wrath; what warrior opposed Drona when he marched against Abhimanyu.
Thereupon the heroic Bhishma, that slayer of foes along with all those Prabhadrakas slew (Karna) on every side and cut off his head by means of another dart in between his two eyes.
And there appeared as the emblem of that hero a huge bull, red in colour and resembling fire or the sun. That very beautiful figure was like that of Ghatotkacha whose eyes were blazing with anger.
When the princess of Mithilā was being carried away, she went towards that quarter in which her husband had gone. Those animals (that accompanied him) began to look at those directions with their eyes and noses; they came back when Lakşmaņa pointed out to them by gestures what direction he wanted them to take and how far off were his brother's traces. They said thus: "This is your Lord! And here are the tracks leading from this place southwards.” Thus saying, the intelligent Lakşmana spoke these words to Rama who was greatly agitated “Where did you ask for Sītă? Why have all these animals risen up together?" The fact that they showed us a southern point on the earth and the same direction (as marked by foot-marks), seemed highly suspicious as we thought it might be some other animal or Aryan men living there.
As the sun shines in his own quarter, as Agni burns on Svaha and Vasava dwells on Sachi, so did that royal sage live happily there.
Then Karna, in the sky pierced that son of Bhima by means of his arrows. The latter then looked like a mass of clouds struck with lightning flashes by Indra himself.
By your favour, men obtain the fruits of their sacrifices and penances and other religious rites in this world as also those that are superior to these.
He, who has been gratified by another and is not capable of being angry with him again for any reason whatever should be considered as a person that will return benefits.
But that which is done with the desire of acquiring merit and fame, or for one's own self (without any external motive), requires great exertion.
The Brahmanas are the source of our long life, fame and strength. They have all the worlds within their control; they are themselves the lords thereof; everything depends upon them for its existence in this world. In acquiring virtue, riches, pleasure and even a state above the three-fold objects which men seek after, it is through the good offices of the twice-born ones that we succeed.
That wicked son of the charioteer, like an elephant wishing for a combat with another, desires to fight me. O prince, bring him here; he is proud because he has found shelter in Duryodhana's (evil) counsels.
Alas! I have been killed by whom shall my peace be regained from this fire? I am now an orphan and will die with these children.
Know me as your messenger, confide in my words. I shall again and again give you the counsel of Vidura, that all-knowing minister; (also) know for certain that you will conquer Karna, Duryodhana with his brothers and Shakuni also together with their followers.”
O you of great strength, do what I say. It is for the good both of myself and Partha that this idea has come into my mind.”
And desirous of fruit, he saw the sun rising like a man engaged in Japa (a mode of worshipping) with flowers and Upaskaras* on his person. *Small pieces of wood used for worship by Hindus.
I wish that the three Lokapalas (guardians of all worlds) accompanied by Shakra, should be invited as guests. Do you make proper arrangements for this purpose."
The elder brother of Lakşmaņa, having his person covered with blood in battle was seen like a huge tree adorned (with blossoms) in the forest.
Having conquered me with his energy he made me subject. The whole world was then shrouded in gloom, O Bharata and the smell of fish which I detested much became prevalent everywhere. Renouncing that bad odour this Rishi gave me a good one.
With his armlets, ear-rings and the necklace of pearls he looked like a mass of clouds with lightning flashing in it.
Who were those heroes that opposed Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna who was proceeding against Drona like Death himself?
A king, who has a good understanding of the duties that should be observed by him in every case and also sees everything through the eye of virtue is capable of protecting his subjects. Virtue, wealth and punishment are all necessary for kings, O foremost of twice-born ones.
That virtuous king, oppressed with grief and afflicted with sorrow retired into his own chamber. He then heard the lamentations of all around him.
Some Rishis perform the sacrifice of knowledge, some that which is acquired from the Vedas; and others celebrate those great sacrifices in their minds.
O lord of the gods, you are said to be the seed from which everything has grown. You have dispelled all fears from my heart by taking me under your protection as a father takes his child.
Surely the wealth of Sarayu is increasing as it cannot contain me, coming like a war-cry from Ayodhyā.
Seeing Vikarna thus killed, his brothers rushed against the cars of Subhadra's son.
When Hanumān was thus carrying that child, the gods and Dānavas were highly astonished.
Then that best of men, the king (Yudhishthira), after bowing down his head before Virata and walking in a dignified manner entered into the palace.
O descendant of Bharata, the earth is now covered with arms smeared over with sandal-paste and adorned with Angadas and ornaments and decked out with garlands and Keyuras.
As if worked up with anger, that one (Indra), burning the trees in the forest and working himself into a rage. The lord of cattle, Matalangi by name had been six years old when he was three parts burnt.
Seeing his misbehaved son Madhu was filled with wrath and he began to lament, but did not utter a word.
One should by means of knowledge, as it were extinguish the mental fire in a similar way. When that mind is made tranquil, his body also becomes quiet and calm.
Thereupon Dhananjaya cut off the heads and arms of those that rushed towards him with his shafts shot from Gandiva.
Thus addressed, the king again spoke thus in reply-"Go you at my command and say to that goddess of good vows-Do this.' She is sure to grant your wish. O foremost of twice-born ones, forsooth she will give away these ear-rings."
The Govinda (Krishna) having thus entertained his friends, the Kurus with a smile and treating them as relatives of his own.
Then the high-souled Abhimanyu began to strike each one of them with five arrows all furnished with wings and straight knotted shafts.
Having passed by the palace of Vibhīşaņa, that foremost of monkeys with great energy destroyed it in regular order.
"You shall not die for your father has been pleased with you." From the great Rishi Bharadvaja was born Drona in the wife of his preceptor (Drona's mother).
Dharmaputra said, The Sun is Arjuna and the Moon is Bhaga; Atri's son is Ashta (Ashvini); Pushan (Aryaman) is Surya or Savita. Agni has three forms viz., Gavashti, Jana and Kalagni (the latter being called Kala in later times). Death is Dhatr (Prajpati), Night is Prabhakara (Brahman as presiding deity over night.) Earth is Apshu, Heaven is Tejas and Air is Parayana. Som, Brihaspati, Shukra, Budha, Angaraka are the seven planets that move around the sun. Indra is Vishnu with his conch, discus and mace of energy. Vivasvat is fire which gives out light by its own energy. Pashupati is He who protects all creatures, the Creator himself who created Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Varuna and Yama. Vaishvanara (fire) is the destroyer of diseases. Vedikartta, Dharamadhaja and Vedangin are also names for Him. Treta, Dvapara and Kali are the three periods in this cycle. Samaya, Kashtha, Muhurta, Kshapa, Yama and Kshanam are His parts. Ashva means a horse and so it refers to Samvatsara whose period lasts only one year, Chakra means circle, therefore Chakravarti (one who moves round like a wheel) is another name for him. Purusha is eternal, Yogeshvara (Lord of Yoga), Avyaktachaitanya, Eternal, Adhyatma (Supreme Soul,) Adidevo (first God) etc. are other names for Him. Ugrakhila is the bow of the Supreme Lord, Kapila is colourless, he destroys all sins and Kamadevu (he whom everything wishes after their attainment.) Jaya is Victory, Visalaha (long-armed) is prosperity and bestower of boons, Sarvadhatu-nishtah (of universal form) means what can be seen from every side, Manasa-suparna (having mind for wings) and charata-charatmacha (moving in different ways at once) are some more names given to him. Dwadasahatmakshi (two eyes of 12 rays), father, mother, grandfather and
O Janardana, a hundred thousand thousands of gold were spent in every sacrifice and each portion was duly filled up.
I then saw the illustrious Narayana of infinite prowess, in his bovine form. He is known by such names as Purusha and Ananta and Vishnu and Shukla (white) and Sarvabhutapita or grand father of all creatures and Munchakesha (having a garland made up of Munja grass).
Then Chitrasena, Vipathaka and Pratayana accompanied by Jyachitra and Jayasandha advanced towards Bharata.
I am again burning with anger, O celestials for the reason that like my mother's feet those of Karna have been seen by me. Therefore shall not Shakra himself defeat us in battle together with Karna.'
Seeing him thus stupefied, the charioteer quickly drove away his horses. Trained in all accomplishments of horsemanship, he soon made them escape from battle-field with a great speed.
Vasuki in the lady of hundred heads; and Dhananjaya (Arjuna) in Kumari, as Janardana is in Rukmini.
Hearing these words of the celestial messengers, king Puruva was greatly delighted and said unto his priest and ministers "Listen you all to what has been spoken by that messenger from heaven.
Then stretching his Gandiva, he suddenly created a thick darkness with showers of arrows; and then cutting down the horses cars and standards in that battle.
This hero of terrific prowess, who has never been vanquished in battle and whose energy is inexhaustible and his courage very high, can surely not have fallen down so unexpectedly.
Then Bheema rushed against your son with great activity, like a lion rushing towards an elephant in the forest.
Sanjaya said Thereupon, O monarch, Yudhishthira and the Pandu Bhimasena encompassed Drona's son on all sides.
Thereupon that heroic general of the army, that Rākşasa named Prajangsha resembling a dark cloud in his features addressed them with folded hands saying.
And even so the Kārandava, after drinking water with his beak, sport delightedly (in it), as if incited by desire.
O son of Sumitra, enjoy all sorts of agreeable and pleasant objects as also the fruits that result from sovereignty. I desire your life and kingdom for you.”
Thereupon Ashtaka left his city, which looked like the abode of Soma and taking away with him a maiden for marrying her to one of his disciples went into exile.
When one recites the Rāmāyaṇa either at noon or in the evening, with a concentrated mind and attention, he never meets with any sort of calamity.
Then that hero, the son of Karna, having crossed over the ocean which is so difficult for one to cross in battle (that consists of Drona's troops) reached Daushasana and met with his death.
Beholding Bhimasena, the rulers of earth headed by king Yudhishthira began to discharge their arrows and thus afflicted Kritavarma.
Beholding that, his senses became confounded with joy. And being overcome by passion he spoke thus to the son of Sumitra.
Going a little way, the king saw his daughter and thus speaking to her with pleasure as if he was talking to Jamvuka (the prince of deer) in the forest.
Thereupon the king Yudhishthira and Bhima, the son of Pandu (with Nakula and Sahadeva) protected Satyaki.
Indra said : You will go with your thousand cars and surrounded by your relatives, conquering all the worlds without any effort.
The lord of earth made the whole world Kshatriya. He then cut off five countries, each extending over a Yojana on every side and caused them to be filled with blood.
That person, who saves his father from the hell of Narakas, is called Putra (son). This name was given by him that gave birth himself.
Those Yatis, who are possessed of Yoga and knowledge of the Soul, who have their senses under control, who hold that all things are devoid of individuality and personality on account of being subject to change, which is the cause for apprehension, and owing to pride in oneself (on account of such apprehensions), consider these two viz., the Unmanifested with Change as Eternal. We have heard that it is Unmanifested but yet Manifested.
I always protect you; and should be protected by you. You are a warrior, so it behoves me always to guard you."
Then the king Yudhishthira, stricken with grief and sorrow bewailed aloud saying “What a hero is Abhimanyu! He has been slain by his brother."
Those great and highly powerful celestials have all been described as the shares of Indra in connection with this Anshavatara.
He, who knows the truth about all things as they are and who understands fully their merits, is freed from sin. Liberated from fetters he enjoys happiness in this world with all creatures.
Thereupon, O king Pritha did not show her dislike towards the Brahmana by abusing him or uttering any unpleasant words.
My mind, O son is frequently agitated and I am continually thinking of it. It does not behove you to grieve for me who have attained to the other shore.
Tell me how the battle was fought. Who fought and who fled in fear?
Killing him, the lord of men returned with his army in safety and joy to their city.
Hearing these excellent words uttered by Rāghava, Mahesvara said.
Like two large trees in a garden, those brothers looked like shining golden deers. And they shone on the field of battle as if in full bloom and ready for plucking.
Even as Nakula, O king, discharged his arrowy shower. So also Subala's son displayed all the accomplishments of arms in battle.
O king, men are born in different castes due to ignorance and meet with death from the same cause. As they become ignorant so also do their descendants. Thus through ignorance persons fall into lower orders of being in this world.
They returned as before and were all restored to their original condition. The great virtue of the Bhrigu's curse was that they again became omnivorous.
The iron mace was broken into pieces and its string of pearls also snapped. And the sword, freed from that strong grasp of his foe's left hand fell down on earth.
The pleasures of life are like the sprouts that appear in a plant. Death is its root. Anger, however, which dwells in the body and which affects only embodied creatures, has been said by wise men as being itself also a form of death.
Like a fierce fire which spreads and burns up everything, the desire in me has been kindled by you. And this fire is now burning my heart;
The king, afflicted with grief and sorrowful at heart began to think thus-'No doubt good has come of Partha since the sound of that conch is being so loudly blown by Arjuna.
Rāma, with his senses overwhelmed by grief went along the lake thronged with lotuses and lilies.
May they be blessed who are offering up their bodies in sacrifice and subjugating the enemies of Brahma. Let them have peace with us hereafter! Once upon a time, Manu thus spoke to those heroic men whom he had sent into heaven after defeating his enemies in battle.
The Rakshasa said : Why do you come with him? Bring him here. We shall soon devour this Hidimba! You have no time to lose in the matter.
Then those two immortals, the Narayana and Nara brothers practised austerities in that Badari asylum on an excellent golden car.
The happiness of the world, and that great felicity which is found in heaven,-these are not worthy for him who has acquired eternal bliss by casting off his desire.
For this I have come hither, for these am I desirous of acquiring (knowledge). It is with the intention of obtaining them that today at last I enter into the abode of Pannaga.
That best of men, the king (Rāma), began to range over that army like a fire-wheel. And with his shafts he covered all sides and sides of those Saindhava troops.
On these depends the prosperity of all creatures. These four are the support and stay of men in this world, they confer upon them fame and glory and wealth;
Hearing these sweet words of Sugriva, Hanuman with a delighted heart and embracing him in return, patted the hand which had been held by his friend.
And hearing those sweet notes of the birds, pleasant and agreeable to listeners, Gautama's son approached.
O lord of the immortals, for acquiring power I had performed this austerities. Brahma has conferred on him (Agastya) six thousand years' duration and great effulgence as well as prowess among ascetics; he also possesses an excellent body, energy, greatness in strength and gracefulness of limbs.
You intelligent men do not act in those matters which are opposed to the performance of your duties and where many sins arise from them.
Vaishampayana said : Thereafter the son of Kunti, Yudhishthira asked that great Rishi Markandeya about the future course of this world.
O Rāma, my nativity is not auspicious; the stars are ill aspected by fierce planets. The astrologers say that I shall be consumed in fire and smoke like the sun at the time of an eclipse.
The entire universe will, forsooth be transformed into the form of a Mleccha. At the end of Yuga, one hand shall destroy another
O king, there was a Kshatriya named Gadhi. His son Vishvamitra became famous for his prowess on earth.
Then by night and sleep they were again attacked with darkness. The Kurus, though checked both by Drona himself as also your son.
That foremost of car-warriors, viz., the son of Ganga began to slaughter hundreds and thousands of Pandava soldiers in that battle with his keen arrows.
The king should, like a father, protect his soldiers and not break them down. When the latter is done by him he becomes guilty of sin.
Having bowed down his head in reverence and having adored the words of Pitamaha, he again thought with an abstracted mind on that celestial maiden who was free from attachment.
Sanjaya said O great king, the warriors on both sides exerting themselves at their utmost and shooting numerous arrows rushed towards Yuyudhana.
I have heard that this eternal, undecaying and inexhaustible knowledge of duties is the best means for acquiring great merit.
Hearing those words of Rāma, that foremost of ascetics began to relate the story from days gone by.
Thereupon, the huge Rākşasa taking up his bow and arrow with rage hurled it at Laksmana as if he were drawing in a thunder cloud.
Do you now consider the duties of royalty; do not cast us off all at once. The loss of truth by a Kshatriya is never approved, for it leads him into sin.
Then the fierce and powerful Bhima addressing Yudhishthira, who stood there with Sanjaya blazing like fire said-“I will fight in battle this one who is coming towards me. This vilest of men cannot vanquish me in battle."
Smiling, the son of Drona said these words to Devaki's son-This warrior is going towards Satyaki's chariot.
Having that foremost of the Shini race, riding on his chariot entered into your army what did the Kauravas do?
Duryodhana said : O you of a liberal disposition, I ask you this question-whether Bhima and Arjuna with Sahadeva and your husband (Drupada) as also Nakula and the son of Yajnasena will abide by what you say.
Then the son of Kunti, Yudhishthira said-We have been robbed of all our wealth and kingdom; we are reduced in splendour. We shall now go into the forest living on fruits and roots. The forest is full of inconveniences and inhabited by various snakes and poisonous reptiles.
Arjuna, smiling as if he was only joking with those Brahmanas who had come there for seeing him and said-You all stand here on my right side.
The clatter of the drums, conchs and cymbals; as well as the twang of bows and arrows on all sides were heard by those Kuru warriors.
The son of Satvata, with his gold standard and golden car, having drawn a deep breath from the bottom of his heart, shot five arrows at Yantara's charioteer, four each into the breast and arm-holes (of all) the rulers of the Sindhus.
This one is the virtuous and righteous (Brahma). He bestows boons on all. He creates everything. He exists before creation; he has his own light,
Thereupon the cars of those foremost car-warriors, having their wheels mangled by Arjuna's arrows and with the steeds slain or wounded began to send up loud war-cries.
Yudhishthira said What is that act of purification by which a Brahmana may always be purged off his sins? O you of great wisdom, I desire (to hear) this from you who are the foremost of all virtuous men.
Then the son of Kunti again and again asked that chastiser of foes, viz., Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), about Shakra's younger brother. The lord of earth then described Shakra's youngest brother Vishnu.
If you again speak thus in my presence, I shall break your head with this mace which is like the thunder-bolt itself.
Thus addressed by the illustrious Vyasa, that lord of earth viz., the son of Pandu and all his ministers became satisfied with Yudhishthira.
I shall send my daughter away; and do you remain in the car, O king. But until I return from another place for collecting tribute,
Those two foremost of car-warriors, those perfect archers viz., the son of Pandu and Vasudeva's descendant, then covered Dhananjaya with a downpour of arrows from all sides. That battle was wonderful indeed for they fought on their cars which were furnished with chariots yokes, standard, flags and horses; but none could see them in that fight.
Like a snake that is angry, Sahadeva when he came there was eager for battle with his enemies. He could not be conquered in fight by the strength of any foe.
The Kaurava then pierced the son of Shini, that invincible warrior in battle with ten sharp arrows shot from his bow-string.
O king, I also saw the devotion of Arjuna for you when he was proceeding towards Dwarka.
O Dhananjaya, this entire universe is the seed of time; and it is by Time that all things are destroyed again.
Having said this, those fourteen Raksasas with uplifted weapons rushed upon Rāma.
The Magadhas, the Madhuparkikas and other people belonging to various tribes sang in praise of that foremost of men.
Indra said : O Matanga, your Brahmanhood is not in accordance with what I see here. The status of a Brahmana can never be acquired by you who are so hard-hearted and vicious as also surrounded by many evil-minded persons.
O Lord, in the case of loss of children or wealth and even that of relatives and friends one is stricken with grief like a blazing fire.
Having consoled Bharata, and the illustrious Kausalya; having seen Kaikeyi Sumitra as well as Lakshmana's mother, (and) having obtained Ayodhya with its citizens, have established Ikşvāku dynasty in this world of men, O mighty one! Have performed a horse-sacrifice and gained high fame. And after giving wealth away among Brahmanas you should repair to heaven.'
Then beholding those Kshatriyas, hardy in battle, advance towards them under the leadership of Karna (the son of) Surya, they were filled with fear and rushed against their enemies like two elephants fighting one another.
O descendant of Bharata, then there was a great joy in heaven. That day which made all the friends happy and increased their pleasure became highly sacred (in consequence).
And the Rākşasa, taking up an Uśnişa resembling a royal swan in hue and having its headpiece slightly loosened by use, put it on his head as if for gazing at water.
Hearing this, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa said, 'O king, O best of the Bharata race, they (the Pandavas) are afraid that their whole family will be destroyed. Therefore let them remain at least for some time in accordance with our promise.' Vasudeva is desirous of destroying us all.
Bali was always inimical towards the Brahmanas on account of his boyish nature; and it is because he had no strength that (the story) has been narrated.
Thereupon Rāma with a shaft of golden hue, shot off the three-eyed Indra's bow resembling a serpent for its use.
Saluting the old men and the others worthy of respect, he went on his way from forest after forest.
Vaishampayana said : Then Satyavati, smiling thus spoke to Bhishma.
In the five great elements, sound and touch and form and taste and smell as also action exist in those.
That which is seen by all, and therefore not liable to deception; that in consequence of which the Kshatriyas are established as having their duty for promoting universal good;
Surrounded by the Kurus Drona vanquished Satyaki, Chekitana, Dhristadyumna and Shikhandin as also Vardhakshemi, Atreya's son (Bhima) Senabindu of Suvarchasa and many other kings belonging to various countries.
Those who give shelter, those that are liberal and charitable and they who accept gifts from the king; these three always suffer misery.
Vaishampayana said : Seeing the king of dreadful appearance, with long rays and blood-stained.
O king, the lady of that name is well known in this world and held as sacred by all good men. Vasishtha has been appointed her preceptor.
Agni said O Brihaspati, I do not see the king of gods anywhere. The waters are exhausted and there is no means for me to go in them.
And Janardana, ever ready with his bow in hand, saved him from great dangers. O descendant of Bharata, knowing this truly you should now honour Yudhishthira as your king.
Thereupon addressing the wretched ones who were living by begging, he said : 'Having distributed wealth among you all and granted you each a livelihood, Laksmana's mansion as well as this my house are now empty.
The king, O best of the Bharata race, remembering Kausika and Chitrasena at that time when a battle was impending.
O descendant of Bharata, install yourself in the kingdom and rule over it; do you marry with propriety (according to your rank); follow virtue; never act against virtue.
You have, O king of kings, duly protected your subjects. Having them with you and being yourself supported by a large number of soldiers, do not fear the enemy's attack.
Thereupon Sugrīva, the elder brother of Lakşmaņa, with a cheerful countenance began thus for informing him about the cause of his enmity.
If this man be the Creator of all things, why does not your foolish self understand that he is a Brahmana?
O great Rishi, for your every deed and for all the asceticism that you have practised in this world of ours, do you possess energy, understanding and bravery.
Bhishma said The son of Drona looks upon it as righteous; Kripacharya also considers the same way. But, for his desire to observe the duties of a Kshatriya and nothing else (Karna) wishes only war with Arjuna
There was no sign of being overtaken. The noise made by the sounds of conchs and drums, O king, that rose high up in the air, could be heard on all sides (in that battle).
Vibhatsu alone, with the Somakas and many Matsyas in alliance with him, began to fight against the Kurus.
With bows, with mighty arrows and javelins of gold, and thousands of other weapons.
He who has confidence in all creatures, and for whom all have confiance; he from whose mind the delusion of fear is removed, himself experiences no apprehension from any quarter.
They then went and bowed down to that unconquerable one, Vaikuntha. The celestials then addressed Madhusudana thus:-
How, again, did that dreadful and mighty battle take place? Where also was the scene in which Karna fought with Yudhishthira.
O Janardana, out of ignorance or fear I could not then bring myself face them. But they cannot be so again now, O descendant of Vrishni race."
One never tolerates that which is not right. The act of enmity has been enjoined by the scriptures, and even a good man should tolerate faults in others when they are brought about by circumstances.
Thus united with the wind, he looked like a large hill united in one body and covered by thick clouds.
A foolish man, who is always under the influence of lust and anger, becomes a thief when he attempts to steal.
That mace, O king, hurled by Bhimasena and rendered ineffective in consequence of the latter's prowess, began to shake the earth with its loud twang.
The son of Pandu had already heard that the mountain was cursed; and yet he did not understand what sorrow it would bring about on all those who were afflicted.
When he plays with our young children of tender hearts, the king's mother takes pleasure in casting her daughter-in-law into Sarayū.
In consequence of the Rākṣasa's wrath, and on account of his compression of arms (in anger), Viravas suddenly came out, who had made all three worlds shake.
Thus, O king, the great Rishi praised Sarasvati. And she carried away that Brahmana with velocity towards Vishvamitra's hermitage; and repeatedly told him of his arrival at his asylum.
When king Parikshit began thus to draw the earth by his ascetic power, Indra said to all the celestials-What does this royal sage desire?
And knowing the sinful nature of Madanikas and their own happiness, they drank what they pleased with music and song.
We see that we are born in the world and proceed from it, knowing this eternal self within you, worship him.
He then began to destroy with his arrows the elephants which were being driven by other men, and also those that had been furnished with golden trappings; and horses too and car-warriors.
Those two best of car-warriors, those two heroes and wielders of mighty weapons-the Satvata (Krishna) as well as the Sini hero advanced against one another.
Then was seen in person the worshipful Govrishadha, accompanied by Uma and bearing a bow of many colours.
Truth is ever united with merit; it has five marks and the Brahma, penances and Prajapati are all truth.
You will acquire what you desire and also the state that is sought for by Sankhya-Yoga. Having said this, the illustrious one (Vyasa) turned towards him again.
Then the field was filled with troops of gods and Asuras, armed with swords and clubs, lances, darts, maces, bludgeons, various kinds of shields emitting great sounds; also it contained many other celestial weapons.
Some had him for their brother and some had him as a friend. The Rishis too took care of him like his own son.
O ruler of earth, the highly powerful Goddess Varahi has given me her boon that she will always be present with those who constantly recite this mantra.
That best of men Dhananjaya took up that standard on his car. Then there ensued a fearful fight between the two heroes, both riding elephants.
Hearing those words fraught with the good of his own self Sugriva was highly pleased and said.
O king of men, I wish to touch your head with my hands; and this will be a great pleasure for me.
Hearing these words of Bharata and being angry with the slayer of foes, Saumitri became incapable bearing them. And he then rose up in anger; but smilingly took his bow.
My kingdom was taken away by unfair means and all my subjects were made slaves. In the midst of a great assembly I, with one cloth on me, have been insulted (by you).
Having said this, he with a pure heart began the fast and performed many pious rites in company of Vaidehi.
And thousands of those horsemen and foot soldiers, armed with swords, axes and darts became heroes who never retreated.
When Karna took up that great weapon, which was given by the celestials. Having thus acted in battle he got back on his chariot again.
Like the end of a Yuga, he with his eyes expanded in anger and holding up two sharp arrows resembling serpents by their hissings, began pouring them on Karna.
All the princes of Dhritarashtra's family, all kings and royal youths have been killed by you in battle.
Thereupon the troops of Yudhishthira, filled with loud roars like those caused by a rising tempest in the ocean and all their horses galloping wildly along, killed your army consisting of mighty car-warriors.
All creatures are happy in happiness; and they fear greatly the afflictions of misery. One who has faith does not perform such acts as cause pain or fear (to others).
Beholding the heroic Karna fallen on earth, pierced with shafts and his person bathed in blood, Duryodhana left him there who had lost all his regiments.
Rantideva gave away his entire kingdom, together with its wealth and people. With proper rites he then devoted himself to the great Vashishtha.
As the Kurus delightedly laugh and laugh again, he also thinking within his own mind was filled with anxiety.
That man who renounces the desire that is hard of being conquered, and which cannot be subdued by him who wishes for subjugating it; whose end is death.
The son of a high-born lady, the father and mother as well as his brothers and sons have their respective fortunes. A woman attains not her husband's fortune alone; therefore I am ordered by him to live in this forest.
The Rishis call him Madhusudana and Janardhana; the lord with three steps, he is Varaha (boar), Simha (lion) in his deeds.
And the footpaths on those charming mountains were covered with beautiful flowers, and they also made a pleasing sound.
Seeing the deer lie down on the ground without any fear, Jambuka went and bathed in that lake.
Seeing that both of them were equally powerful and held maces, the celestials Gandharvas and men felt great wonder.
Vyasa said O best of the Kurus, you should not grieve for those great car-warriors among the Vrishnis and Andhakas who were all burnt by Brahma's curse.
And the Apsara (Sarasvati) brought me forth in a cave of Himavat, and she went away as if leaving her son.
O wicked one, when Shalva had gone away and his army was routed. That powerful Daitya son of Hrada, named Vagavat rushed against my child (Arjuna).
The gods and the Asuras, O Bharata, began to visit those sacred places. But pride of virtue soon possessed them all.
And they saw many excellent mansions, with staircases and balconies for easy access. They were adorned with golden pillars; their gates were studded with pearls and gems of exquisite fragrance.
Today, O Rākṣasa, you shall taste the warm blood of Rama that has been drawn out by a sword from his body lying on earth.
There he met a highly powerful man named Bak. He was as terrible and strong as the son of Hidimba (Bhima).
Without any effort, men perform acts of all sorts; without any care they renounce them. The sense that distinguishes the noble from the mean and which is capable of distinguishing also high objects from low ones forms a part of man's natural endowment.
Having gone to the holy asylum of Chyavana frequented by persons belonging to both orders, we have eaten a hundred fruits and roots.
When this unavoidable calamity has befallen you, what is your plan? You are a man of foresight.
Why do you perform the funeral rites of a Chandala, as if he were an honest man?
Then the son of Pandu quickly sent a chariot for Duryodhana. O king, at that time he had nine cars with their shafts broken.
One who takes food on the twelfth day of a month which is triple in length, acquires the merits of giving away kine and sports with Apsarās.
And the men also, covered with dust and bespattered with blood from head to foot, looked as if they had been struck by lightning.
And the great river, which has sand for her bed, joins one branch of it with another. The water is always mixed with rice and pulse and flesh and vegetables and curds or sour milk (panir).
Hearing that her young children were dead, the chaste mother of those ascetics began to bewail in grief and sorrow.
When an idea is once entertained in the mind, it becomes painful when one tries to get rid of it.
I am not at all satisfied with you, since having left Maithili here have come back on hearing her angry words.
This man who is lying dead in the field, having been slain in battle by me has terrified Shakra and Yama; he has also taken away from Vaishravana his car Puşpaka. He had frightened all Gandharvas and Rsis as well as those high-souled celestials (the gods). Having created terror amongst Asuras and Gods alike as well as among serpents, this one was not afraid of any fear that might be brought upon him by others. The very fact that a man is unafraid proves that it must have originated from human beings.
I never speak thus with one who is not self-controlled, or one that is ungrateful; nor should you hear it from me if you are an inattentive listener.
O Brahmana, truthfulness in serving the preceptor and abstention from anger and charity these four qualities always characterise a virtuous man.
Brihaspati, the deity of knowledge, recited those sciences which form part of Veda and Anga. The son of Bhrigu (Rishi) also delivered that science called politics for the welfare of all living creatures in this world.
Men like you, who are gifted with intelligence, never engage in works that produce evil effects and which contain many faults.
He sent Sanjaya, for the purpose of paying his respects to all kings. That great-minded warrior knew both what was accomplished and not yet achieved by Bhishma and Drona.
Having heard this, the king said to all his subjects “Protect your lives and obey my orders."
O foremost of the Kurus, Vritra endued with great strength and highly wonderful illusion (power) began to confound all the gods by means of his illusions.
As your family and religion may not be destroyed, so do you also, O chastiser of foes, please the friends.
Then that great bowman, the greatly powerful Satvata (Krishna), excited with wrath once more struck the son of Sini on his breast.
Hearing of the mode of cooking meat, and hearing his words, that tiger commanded (the cook) saying “Slaughter this cow."
And on the car, innumerable garments of various hues and made by workmen (for Rāvana), seem to shiver with their breathing.
O Bharata, as the full moon is seen in a day of crescent so do you see your son born.
As the tide retires from the sea, so did Hridika's son repulse the Pandava army in battle.
O Sītā, this is the fruit of my evil deed that I have been afflicted with grief. For having banished Vibhisana for being pious and graceful,
In this place is Narayana, Krishna and that best of men Jishnu. Here also are the eternal Brahma and Brahmanas;
And those car-warriors, horses, men and elephants with their weapons and ornaments as well as the dresses and armours of slain warriors were seen lying on earth, in sky and all round.
Then Karna said, "Listen to me. O king of elephants! I shall not run away from the battle field so long as Arjuna is alive. Nor will I eat that flesh which has been cut off by a sharp-edged weapon; nor will I follow the practice of an Asura (viz., deceitful). If any one asks me anything, I shall never say 'no'.”
You consider that the son of Kunti, Vrikodara is capable; but O descendant of Bharata, you do not know his full power.
And depending upon the charity of grass and living in an unknown manner, they lived there.
What did the Kurus do, urged on by time? How also were they brought under subjection in that terrible and fateful battle.
Hearing these words of Partha, the heroes among the Vrishnis, with eyes red in anger and proud hearts rushed out (of their houses).
The king is killed by the minister and he also becomes an instrument for killing his own friends. He has, therefore, incurred punishment from a human being.
I will follow you today, forsaking my kingdom and wealth. Do you enjoy with Bharata your royal prosperity for ever.”
In this great battle, O Arjuna, that you have fought in heaven with the king of gods (Indra) is exactly like your own.
The Agnihotra sacrifices are no longer celebrated. And the sun has disappeared from our sight, as also all other creatures have been destroyed.
Then Lakşmaņa took up the excellent bow and fitted an arrow on it. He drew that shaft with great force, and then shot it off.
That great bowman Drona is now sporting in battle with Yuyudhana, like a child playing on the terrace of his house and catching birds by means of strings.
The highly powerful Nila, after having hurled Nikumbha and Piplada with great force, jumped up again in the air. And catching Nikumba's head by his arms he twirled it round on all sides. He then raised him high from the ground like a huge mountain.
Draupadi said In the creation of living beings, Asita and Devala have declared that you are one Prajapati (the Creator) who creates all creatures.
Thus in obedience to the commands of Ahuka, Janardana (Krishna), Rama and that high-souled one Babhru. O king, have prohibited all persons living within this city from drinking wine or other intoxicating liquors for ever hereafter; and also decreed that whosoever amongst us shall drink without our knowledge any sort of beverage even if he be alive, must immediately take up a spear with his own hands and place it on his shoulders together with those of his relatives."
Persons doing good deeds, even if they be cruel and violent in their ways of life, attain heaven. Those persons who are wicked but do not commit any sinful deed attain the highest end (after death).
And on the destruction of their leader, the rangers of the night were deprived of hope and fled away in all directions.
He who takes his meals from the meat of kine or Brahmanas, wine or a bed that belongs to his preceptor acquires an increase in progeny and becomes the cause for multiplying Rakshasa race.
One who has given up wealth, and is living on alms, can only enjoy sensual pleasures; for he cannot perform any good deeds.
And do you today, like the birds of Garuda rending serpents, tear away those limbs that are falling off and have been deprived by me.
You must do what I say in your mind. The king will allow you (to go away) and order you as it pleases him."
If you consider your son worthy of being sent there, we shall go with him. But I think that it is not proper for the king and his sons to remain together in one place for a long time; they should be sent away from each other.
The Panchala princess, shedding tears of distress in abundance and sighing again and again bewailed aloud for her breasts which were large and round like those of a newly-born calf.
Neither by weapons, nor thunderbolt, neither fire nor wind. Nor a dry stick, or an unsplinted one will cure your disease; and if you do not go back from battle I shall be superior to you in prowess."
I wish, along with you both who are my soul and the best of kings like myself (to celebrate) that excellent Rajasuya sacrifice. Therein is eternal virtue.
How, O king, can we defeat in battle that handsome son of Pandu (Arjuna), Dhananjaya who is equal even to Indra himself?
And in course of time, king Yudhajit the descendant of Kekaya sent his preceptor Raghava. That foremost of Brahmanas, that immeasurable effulgence and son of Angirasa's daughter Gaya. He also gave him ten thousand excellent horses, as well as costly blankets, various gems and a rich dress; he presented to Raghu many other beautiful ornaments,
You may also procure meat in abundance for you. Or a cow or an ox, or a boar or a large deer; do what is requisite for the present and whatever else your desire."
The wind (the son of Vayu) followed his own child, who was flying through the sky in fear of being burnt by Surya. He became cool and moist like a clod of earth covered with hoar frost.
Having vanquished Karna in battle, the puissant Bhimasena roared forth a loud shout resembling that of clouds.
O best of the Bharata race, what fruits are given away at Kapila in Jyeshtha (April-May), those also belong to Brahmanas who walk behind their superiors.
In the world enveloped in darkness, nothing could be distinguished. The Kauravas were seen running away on all sides (from that field of battle).
These two foremost of men, Nakula and Sahadeva, being unvanquished in battle even when they are engaged on the same side (with you), may be compared with Ashvins.
Behold the change of time. These Kirata, mighty warriors and hardy fighters in battle are all well-skilled in archery; they also know how to strike with their arms. All these have been defeated by Savyasachin (Arjuna) on the field of battle."
O prince, what you have said is not proper as it does not agree with my understanding. You should take the same course that Rāma has taken and attain success in your undertaking.
The Ritvijas said O king, there is a great sacrifice that has been made for you by the celestials. It was called Sarpa-satra (a sacrifice in which snakes were killed).
Hearing the words of Rāghava, that lord of monkey-armies became exceedingly delighted and said, "Excellent" Excellent."
I have heard that Lankā was burnt down by the power of Vayu's son. Seeing Devi not brought here, it is proper for you all renowned in prowess, to relate what has happened (in Lanka).
By exciting the ire of our lord, O you having a high-soul, we shall certainly kill him today in battle and take away his life.
And the ascetic (Vasishtha) was enraged and said, "Bring me soon that river. Hearing this I shall at once slay him."
Then, O king the son of Pandu, versed in morality (Yudhishthira), with his cold hand gradually wiped away all the dust from Vasudeva's face and breast.
You are the past, you are present and future; your creatures in this world cannot resist or oppose you. I am yours and have taken refuge with you. Do me honour by accepting my worship. O Lord of all things do not torment me for good or bad.
I consider you as the foremost of all intelligent men. You are distinguished by birth, age and learning.
O descendant of Bharata, those two ascetics Vishvamitra and Vasishtha were always engaged in competing with one another. They practised severe austerities for this purpose.
That which is well known by the high-minded Vidura, then that sinful minded one acted in such a way as was detected. Then he (Duryodhana) sent for the learned man and showed him his plan of escape through air with those men who were capable of travelling through wind or ether. He did it on the banks of Bhagirathi river when there was no danger from any creature living therein.
The man who kills a Brahmana or an cow, the mother of all creatures and one that is seeking shelter are equally sinful.
The three qualities, for their productive power, are said not to have origin. (Similarly) the horse and its species belong to a pair of animals; similarly Nature is called Unmanifested or Purusha in which there exists no attribute at all; so also Mitra, Varuna, Prakriti.
Rudra said : O king, you have always been observing Brahmacharya and your mind is always absorbed in meditation. If therefore, you pour libations on the sacrificial fire with ghee alone, without any other ingredients, then, I shall grant you what wish of yours that has come into your heart.
As in the different ages we see various kinds of men having bodies that are like those of one another and forms unlike their own, so do all sorts of mental states exist.
Behold, O wicked-minded one, the fruits of all those evil deeds which you have committed against helpless creatures and even towards me.
The way that is followed by the Brahmanas who are peaceful and pure in conduct, whose minds have been purified through knowledge of all things, those ways which they follow for obtaining their ends with satisfaction-those paths are said to be excellent.
Thereupon the son of Kunti, Dhananjaya (Arjuna), desirous of fighting with his preceptor's sons Muru and Avaha, fought a great fight.
All the other ladies were exceedingly pained with Kunti. They stood round her shedding tears from their eyes,
If that illustrious one of immeasurable prowess had not slain all the Asuras, there would have been no Brahmanas and none else to create this universe. There would have been neither virtue nor vice in it.
Those who become your followers, are freed from all diseases and sins; they live long on earth and enjoy happiness.
Janamejaya said : Having lost their wife and having thus suffered great misery, what did the Pandavas do?
In days of yore, Ushanas spoke these words when Vritra was deprived of his wealth and he (Ushanas) said-“O Danava, why are you not pained today on account of your defeat?
All creatures increase in virtue, and thereupon all of them gain prosperity. And when they are prosperous the whole world is happy; therefore one should never abandon his religion (virtue).
Ashtaka said : When did the ascetics begin their vows of silence? Tell us this, O Shrutavahana! We are very anxious to hear it.
No man can see the mind or eyes of that best of men, Rāghava; nor is it possible for any one else after he has gone beyond him.
The Sadhyas said O Shakuni, we are the celestials called Saddhyas; do you obey us! We ask you about your duties for obtaining salvation. You know all these things and therefore answer our question.
Then from a distance those two foot-soldiers approached the archer Bibhatsu, who was engaged in sacrificing and riding on his Yajñiya horse.
The great Rishis say that Brahman, the lord of all the gods and the Sun himself speak always about you.
They are taken away by the messengers of Yama at his command, all men and women living on earth.
There in the forest, Danda saw Bhargava's daughter of peerless beauty and appearance wandering about. Seeing her he became greatly agitated with desire (for her). And seeing that girl afflicted by his own shafts he went up to her and said anxiously-
That army, consisting of four kinds of troops and stationed on the shore of that vast lake, was protected by king Shalva.
One who is young acquires knowledge; one grown old loses it. After a certain time, the mind becomes weakened and takes only what is agreeable to itself.
Yudhishthira said : O great Rishi, I wish to hear in detail why the king of Videha was suddenly seized with a paroxysm and became senseless out of anger.
Thereat, O king, the high-minded Bhima became very much enraged and called Duryodhana in order that he might fight with him by means of his mace.
Thus addressed, Yudhishthira the king of justice said : By good luck Jishnu (Arjuna) has come back in safety and health.
O hero, we all wish to see that foremost of men. Therefore let us enter the Gandhamadana mountain today."
Having made the soldiers arrange themselves, Drona became highly uneasy; and looking at Duryodhana said in shame.
Thus questioned by Bharadvaja, the illustrious Rishi of Brahma's form then told him everything in answer to his doubts.
They were exceedingly delighted and seemed like two mad elephants. And they began to exchange various kinds of blows with their arms which were as soft as silk.
That arrow, thus imbedded in the forehead of Bhima's antagonist, appeared like a snake-deity on his mountain.
Pandu said : The mode of killing enemies is the same as that of hunting down beasts. You should not blame me for doing what I am fit to do.
O king, remembering that wonderful form of Hari (Visnu) I am greatly surprised and filled with joy.
O Lakşmaņa, the lotuses in this pure water look graceful like those that are shaken by the breeze.
And the king, who was very powerful and exceedingly strong, dragged by force hundreds of tigers that were all proud.
A Brahmana, who is fond of horses and elephants or engaged in the collection of wealth should not be considered as a man of Vedic lore. He that drinks liquor or abstains from food for only one day,
The deer said : O king, I am not a male animal and therefore do not blame me for my sex. But it is proper that you should make love with me out of kindness towards myself.
And also the exile of Rāma; and Dasharatha's death in consequence thereof, as well as Janasthäna's destruction, Jayadrattha being slain (by Sītā), Vāli's slaying, and Vaidehi being carried away,
Do you, therefore, having slain the son of Madhu (Ravana), who was determined on sinning and desirous of ruling this kingdom according to my commandment. O hero do not speak any more about it! As I have commanded before in ignorance a former age by your grandfather's behests must certainly be done; so accept now from me with gladness the installation as king after performing all religious rites like those described in the Vedas in the presence of Brahmanas headed by Vasistha.'
I see that life is in plants, because of the acceptance and rejection by them (of) happiness or misery; but there is no consciousness.
Having said this to the high-souled Laksmana, Rāma of righteous soul spoke thus on that mountain abounding in springs and cascades.
See, O son of Sumitra! The flowers produced by trees are not yet ripe. They have become beautiful like those that bloom in the spring through friction and contact with one another; and they utter their sweet notes like sixfold hills. And, 0 Laksmana, these creepers look exceedingly handsome with blossoms on them.
Hearing these words, all the counsellors and preceptors assembled there. The highly effulgent Vasishtha then said as follows
And having heard the excellent narrative of Dharma from beginning to end, those two princes, without uttering a word in reply, went away after paying obeisance to all their preceptors and guests.
He made all those subjects obedient and conquered the whole earth. And then, O king, according to scriptural ordinances he performed hundred sacrifices with which his heart was highly pleased.
The lady, pained all over her body and deprived of consciousness by the load (of child), sought refuge with Narayana.
Having formed a connection with another, one should desire it and honour his partner. Who then is there who could act so rashly?
Seeing the descendant of Ganga and his son, as also that beautiful damsel who was worthy of being adored by all men Vishvamitra said these words.
When, O king the son of Shini (Krishna) had taken up his position and Kritavarma also was deprived of his chariot all the troops of Duryodhana turned their faces away from the battle-field.
O worshipful one, the kings and princes should always try their best to get rid of attachments for worldly objects.
Like a tiger seizing an animal, Death takes away the person who is afflicted with sorrow and not contented in enjoying objects of sensual pleasure.
Then perceiving that the battle was to continue through the night, he (Duryodhana), inflamed with anger and desirous of slaying Bhima in that encounter, waxed like a maddened elephant or an enraged snake.
Those that have gone away or those who are born again, always suffer from want and grief; they therefore come back to us for our protection.
Thereupon the car-warriors, who were present there and all eager for fight, taking up their huge weapons rushed at Abhimanyu.
I see you, O lord of the celestials, seated on your seat. You are beautiful and effulgent; you roar before me in anger!
And that son of Drona, the unvanquished in battle, O monarch, agitated their camp like a mad elephant disturbing a great lake.
When he had been deprived of his car and bow, when the mace was taken away from him. Kapiketana spoke in a conciliatory tone saying O son! you have sufficiently displayed your manliness; now go back (to the camp). You are still young and therefore it is proper for you not to be rash."
Bhishma said Regarding it is cited the old discourse that took place between Vasudeva and Narada, the Rishi of the celestial.
I have never given way before my father and brothers. If you are a son of mine, wait for me till the fight is over; if not, then punish or be punished by me.”
O Laksmana, do you govern the earth in company with me. This prosperity has come from your second self (Lakşmaņa).
All those people then placed their king, that hero, the slayer of Samsaptakas and also the destroyer of Nivatakavachas.
Thereupon the high-souled Kumbhakarņa, suddenly came out with all his troops and began to destroy that host of monkeys like a fire at the end of an Yuga.
One who makes the horses of ascetics carry him on his back is never weak in energy. I am a great ascetic, possessed of power and lord over past present and future events."
The mind is the lord of all things, and Rudra (Shiva) of all deities. And understanding as a ruler of all mental states; and intelligence as one that controls all senses.
O learned Rishi, I have begotten on my mother two sons as was ordained by the scriptures. The first of these is Vichitravirya and the second is your brother who has been born in a family other than mine; for this reason he cannot be considered my son though he has sprung from me like Bhishma being born through his father's seed but not that of his own body. That foremost of men Shantanu (Bhima) always follows truth and virtue; therefore you should forgive him even if he does not consider you his son or ruler of his kingdom. You are equal with him both as a brother and a kinsman; it behoves us then to show kindness towards our relatives."
The pure are detested by the covetous; those who have a sharp mind (are hated) by persons of sluggish disposition. Persons of low intelligence hate learned men and rich people,
When that mighty car-warrior, Drona's son had been thus repulsed by the Pandava (Arjuna), all his soldiers and followers began to abandon him.
Thereupon those two warriors, that were like a couple of great snakes or two lions fighting for the sake of their mates in the midst of fire and smoke, engaged themselves most furiously.
Learned in all branches of knowledge, well read in the Vedas and other scriptures. They have a vision like that which is seen by persons who are released from this world. They know everything about creatures; they think upon subjects relating to spiritual science.
The snake, the disease which has been described by you. That big sized woman was Jară; wise men call her Rūpavarṇāvināśinī (the destroyer of beauty and colour). O king there is a well in that spot, it is our body.”
Even if the son of Pandu, be accompanied by Indra himself in battle he is incapable of vanquishing you who are possessed of these two ear-rings.
Seeing that the foot-soldiers, horsemen and elephant-riders were all falling down on either side of Duryodhana in anger.
O ruler of men, Satyaki having been thus wounded by Bharadvaja's son in battle, did not do anything else except stand there.
And like two elephants with their trunks, they wounded each other with sharp arrows that were capable of destroying life.
You follow Rāma at his beck and call, but when he is crying in great sorrow you do not come up to him.
When thus commanded by Bhishma, the princess of Sauvira gladly gave her consent and said these words at a fit time.
As if guided by the impulse of his heart, he was sent forth with their permission from Mahameru and Girirāja (the king) in company with Gandhamadana.
The flesh of the beasts, which was cooked and served by your servants with a view to gratify you as well as yourself were in order that they might not be regarded as food for carnivorous animals.
Remembering his own form, and that peerless beauty of the earth; remembering also Dasaratha's highness and exalted mind, he set out.
O king, the warriors of your side became greatly terrified and all lost their senses at that dreadful sound.
Those foremost of the Kshatriyas were not able to restrain Partha, who was like a great elephant carrying away an army (on his back).
Those two illustrious sons of Madri, accompanied by Satyaki soon after the Gandhara king had shot his arrows (at Karna), rushed towards him.
And coming up in front of Janasthana, those dreadful roaring ones emitted various sounds and uttered many kinds of bellowing voices (of beasts).
And with the heads of those heroes, furnished with ear-rings and garlands round their necks; and resembling elephants in size, having the blood flowing from them on account of wounds received by swords, and armed with bows drawn back at full stretch.
Bhishma said Having been roused from sleep and having become hungry, the king of beasts saw no meat that he could eat. He was told by a monkey, "A thief has stolen it."
Beholding the king, Yudhishthira who was well protected by many Sadasyas (priests) and his ministers, they found that he had rested like a mountain peak with its branches entwined round it. That ruler of men lived in great luxury surrounded on all sides by kings and Brahmanas as also by great Rishi's; O monarch, this Tatas were covered over with wealth like clouds filled with water or the back of Garuda with drops of rain.
Yudhishthira said Where was this universe, mobile and immobile created? Whence does it come after its destruction in the universal dissolution. Tell me all these O grandfather!
That man of pure conduct who, after having performed his domestic duties and observed the vow of celibacy (for a certain period), acquires learning by serving as disciple.
Thereupon the descendant of Kakustha, saw in a distant place an archer resembling a mountain and as dark like clouds.
Whatever is the result of a man's mind, whether inward or outward; renouncing it one becomes an ascetic. But he who does not become so loses his time (in vain).
O best of Brahmanas, here in the city of Janaka there is no difference between all four orders. All these are equally engaged with their respective duties,
Who has created this world which contains the earth, water and sky, mountains and clouds, men, fire and wind?
As those wrathful warriors with their followers suddenly came there, the mighty car-warrior Kritavarman alone stood in battle against all the Pandavas.
Why is this king, who should be the monarch of all three worlds and ever devoted to virtue now lying down on earth like a common man?
The undaunted prowess, the heroism and patience of those brothers; their affection for each other that was not human.
Like the thunder-bolt cleaving a mountain, that arrow discharged by Karna of great strength in battle, resembling the roaring sound of the wind whirling through woods, pierced Karna.
And Lankā, difficult of being subdued and hard of access, was entered by him. (And) having been seen there Jānaki in the guise of Sītă by that one monkey only."
As one born in a good family, endued with beauty and strength, is sure to be seen by all men as such; so it behove you to live with your ministers bearing the grief that has come upon them.
The two Suparna, Vacha and Shakhā, the seven Pippalas and ten Gopas support this city. You have created them all; therefore do you live upon these.
Bhishma, Drona, Kripacharya, Karna and Shakuni with the kings cannot even protect you for a sixteenth part of your life when they will be engaged in battle.
I have already told you about the ten and five (Rk) Yajus of Arka. The same has been stated in Purana also by Romaharshana.
Thereupon, O descendant of Raghu, the highly exalted daughter of Varuna came out (of water), seeking her husband.
I do not know the name of that Balin. O Brahmana, tell me its name! It is always in front and it lights up all sides. (It) rains at proper times without taking rest for years together; but still I am unable to see or catch hold of him. Tell me his name?
Seeing that great king slain in battle, the Kurus all began to praise Sahadeva. They then said-"By good luck we have killed our enemy of crooked ways and with his son also; for you are a hero."
We have never heard that all the sons of Bharata were killed with their preceptor. I think, O learned one, it was only Rama who slew his brothers and father in battle along with our illustrious teacher.
At that sound, hundreds and thousands of the warriors belonging to the Pandava army awoke from their sleep.
O descendant of Bharata, wherever the son of Vrishni went he found all favourable winds and everything else also made him happy.
As the Kaleyas were, O king, destroyed by all the celestials when they had received a boon from Agastya so shall be those who will hear me.
Shalya said Having thus spoken, and having dismissed that lady of fair countenance. He yoked the Rishis who had practised severe austerities on his car; and being beside himself with rage he brought those Brahmanas here by force as well as through his own power.
Then Hanumān, with a sweet speech and modest demeanour, came up to those heroes after having saluted them. And that foremost of monkeys spoke to the two heroic princes in their own language; and then he praised both of them according to his mind's inclination. That best of monkeys honoured those warriors duly by speaking soft words as they were like to royal saints of rigid vows. Those excellent ones endowed with prowess and truthfulness, resembling gods or ascetics, were engaged in looking around for this land when you took shelter on these trees growing at the bank of Pampā. You are beautiful; your colour is golden; you have worn bark garments; your arms are long; you breathe hard; you punish people; you stand like lions; and yet you roam about in forest! How did you get into such a country?
That mendicant, who is not a craftsman and yet possesses all accomplishments; whose senses are always under control, always engaged in some work (for the good of his body), without ever indulging in any sensual enjoyment; that traveller on foot from place to places, should be regarded as a proper person for begging alms.
Your insult is the cause of this my incontrollable anger, which I cannot contain like water containing salt.
The foremost of all beings is Purusha. Above the twice-born man are those who understand what should be done and what not,
By every means in his power, let him find out where you are. Thereupon the lord of earth with conciliatory and threatening language questioned all your friends and relatives one by one; he also learned many things from them about yourself. He then saw that army which was famishing (for food) as if afflicted with pain,
Brihaduktha, born of the ascetic austerities of his father and living on earth. At the time when Agnihotra was being performed in this world, he became very much enraged at it.
One should conquer his mental pains with the help of wisdom and bodily afflictions with medicine. It is only by virtue of knowledge that one can attain peace, but a child cannot acquire it.
The inhabitants of the forest were astonished at seeing Rāma's comely person, his gracefulness and beauty and excellent features.
How was this world created, which has the sea and sky within it; mountains with winds in them and earth and fire?
When the Gandiva was drawn and when Savyasachi began shooting, these arrows were shot with his hands.
These childish monkeys are pulling me. And those that have no knowledge of the sport, and who do not know what is a proper place for them in this game, they seek shelter with our enemies.
O best of men, you have adopted the fourth path by following which even those gods are not able to escape from their end. I am surprised at this.
That son of Kunti, always enjoying great luxury and comfort. I do not see a single fault in his person or limbs; if there be any defect that is capable being heard by me, you should tell it out to me.
By the loss of their truthfulness, those men shall have short lives. From the decrease in their lives they will not be able to live any longer on half a portion (of what was theirs before).
Thereupon, those women who were placed in the bed of the king of Kosala (Bhima) went one after another and awakened their husbands.
Neither fear, nor anxiety nor any other of the like sort came upon Duryodhana; he remained calm as a lion in battle.
Reflect upon it and consider, O foremost of the Kurus whether this kingdom is really righteous or wicked. The king of righteousness would not even desire a sinful realm like that which belongs to the celestials."
Seeing the prowess of those two terrible Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, Sumbhū with a trident in his hand sprang out from Śiva's forehead. And thus both these deities sprung up within their own bodies; then Sumbhū assumed human shape and Mahākāla also took on that form.
I am worn out with the weight of years, my strength is gone and all my vital juices have been exhausted. Reflecting on this by means of wisdom, do you cut down this old tree!
Men have never seen such a person before; how is it, O king that you wish to sacrifice the God Shankara as men?
While your body is being covered with poison, this grief of yours will not leave you. O king, as long as it remains in your heart so long will it continue.
O hero, in you is embodied the soul of all beings. Various kinds of animals are seen by you again and again appearing before your eyes (in dream). This month has passed away without any kind of disease being experienced either by yourself or us. Even those that have lost their life-spring seem not dead for want of a good physician. And it seems that women bring forth children when they do so through bodily pain.
Neither Bibhatsu, nor Vrikodara (Bheema), neither Nakula and Sahadeva, not even Yudhistira himself ever transgresses the rules of fair play.
Vritra said I know forsooth that truth and asceticism are the two paths of beings. Therefore, I do not grieve nor rejoice at the birth or death of creatures.
Having killed four horses with his sharpened shafts, that highly illustrious hero cut off the charioteer of Drona.
They restrain their senses and control them with the help of good behaviour. Well taught by their preceptors, they see virtue in all situations.
Devayani said : O child, even I know the difference between virtues and vices. I also know that anger and overbearingness are not good for one who is weak in body or mind;
And Rāma, seated in the Puşpaka furnished with ornaments of gold, resembled Śaśi placed in a cloud.
The Brahmana said : Behold all creatures are subject to sorrow and grief, some of them being better than others in the acts they do.
Arjuna said : If the Gandharvas cannot be induced by fair means then today they shall drink of the blood spilt from their lord. Hearing that true speech, O king, those words spoken by the truthful and honest Arjuna (Dhananjaya) once again entered into the minds of all the Kauravas.
Having been thus addressed, that ascetic said in reply, "O best of kings! Do you listen to me. O king do not let your mind be over-powered by anger; and live with all your brothers as friends."
Protected by the son of Kushika, and adding joy to Kausalyā, Lakşmaņa's brother along with his brother is living in Videha.
Heroism, energy and firmness in battle, dexterity of hand, abstention from flight at the time of fight, liberality, lordliness over others, these are said to be the characteristics of a Kshatriya.
The Maurayans were vanquished, the nooses of Death (that had entangled us) have been loosened and we shall now regain our former happiness.
Seeing his army thus routed, Kritavarman that mighty car-warrior and hero stood up in the field for saving the foe's troops.
Brihaspati is the foremost of celestials, and Shukra that among Asuras; but none can equal in intelligence that best of men.
O king, that army which was returning from the field of battle towards its capital with a great amount of wealth and difficulty began to cheer up the Kurus.
He then went into the region of Vishnu and took his stand there like that which existed before in days gone by.
Thus comforted by Dhaumya, those princes who were distressed at heart became happy and said-"Be you well." They then rushed towards the army with alacrity like vultures following a carcass.
Yudhishthira said : O Sini's grandson, the eternal duty which was seen by good men in days of yore and is still being followed by them has come now.
Thereat, the son of Kuru became enraged at his mace being thus repulsed by him in battle and he resembled an elephant maddened with rage when beholding another one.
There was a fearful and dreadful twilight; beasts, birds and the points of the compass became invisible owing to strong winds blowing from all directions.
Dhritarashtra said My son, who was before like a mountain, struck down by the feet of his enemies and having all four limbs broken; O Sanjaya, what did he say? How could my wrathful king be brought under control when he had been insulted by Pandu's sons. In that terrible battle in which so many men were slain how could it come about?"
This is the best light in this world, ordained for all creatures by that maker of all things. If fools do not control their own faults and those of others then destruction will overtake the whole race of Kuru.
Having pierced the son of Drona with his spear, that highly puissant hero Sutasoma again taking up another sword assailed Dushasana's son.
The five Kekaya brothers, in anger rushed against them. Beholding that the sons of your son were approaching (the Pandavas) those mighty car-warriors.
The son of Drupada, Bhima and Arjuna, Pradyumna the heroic Samba with Abhimanyu, the sons of Virata.
Yudhishthira having been ruined by gambling, suffered a great deal of misery. By the boon that he had obtained on one occasion he now found help from his brothers.
Thereupon all the celestials, headed by Mahendra (Indra), were pleased with that foremost of monkeys having great strength and equal in energy to Maruta himself.
O you best of men, do you rescue Suyodhana who is being taken away (by the Panchalas). Arjuna and Yama also have come here.
The Sarasvati said : O learned Brahmana, it is by those words which the best of men utter in their sacrifices that I have become greatly renowned and also grown up into a river.
And then, O king, the most powerful of Brahmanas was assailed by those dreadful and terrible beings having for their food human flesh.
Rukmini said : O hero, you are the foremost of all men. You will obtain great fame in this world.
The Brahmanas, headed by Dhaumya and others like the principal gods under Prajapati himself (Brahma), surrounded him on all sides.
As the monkeys, lamenting (over Sugriva's misfortune) and shedding tears from their eyes in sorrow, began censuring Sugriva and extolling Vali. All of them gathered around Angada with a view to wait upon him till he had finished his meal.
O slayer of Madhu, enjoying the society and sport with our friends for a short time in the evening we shall return. This will please you very much."
Hearing the speech of his ancestors, that ascetic whose hair stood erect in delight and who was highly energetic said these words. What are those good qualities which a Nila-Pandu person possesses when he is freed from sin? He also performs many sacrifices with lamps and much barley and rice mixed with ghee?
The four modes of life have Garhasthya for their best. All learned men say so, O you conversant with morality! Why do you wish to abandon it?
The Rakshasas have been all destroyed, the forest has been made desolate and a part of our strength is exhausted. But still there remains the destruction of forts."
They, desirous of engaging in battle with Bhishma and wishing for victory at the same time began beating on drums and conchs.
And Bharata too having lived there for a full year, returned to Ayodhyā and worshipped the feet of Rama.
This Unmanifest and Eternal Creator is the Lord of all creatures. Therefore he should be adored, for that Indestructible Being deserves our worship.
Then, as he was on his way towards the place where Arjuna had gone for seeing him. He saw another with eyes resembling lotus-petals and face turned in a different direction from that of Pandu's son (Arjuna).
Entering that charming mansion, and honoured with the best of seats (by his host), he then sat down in it. And thereat the excellent Brahmana was attacked by a pain.
Then the priests with great pleasure installed Dhumatsena on his father's throne and then invested their high-souled son, Yauvaraja (heir-apparent).
Formerly, O king you were obtained by us through penances from Maheshvara. Before your birth the Välas had been created with a view of protecting this world.
Thereupon, O mighty monarch, Karna sent a shower of shafts.
O high-souled descendant of Raghu, you are like an immortal in your energy. You have the truth for your friend; and by virtue of your knowledge you know all things; and you possess a mind that is intelligent and well-developed. And yet it behoves you not to be afflicted with grief on account of any calamity which may happen to you or arise from yourself.
Following them that mighty-armed hero, with his bow in hand and clad in mail, on the car yoked with steeds bearing standards.
Ushanas, having obtained the office of Shukra by pleasing that god of gods (Shiva), now lives in heaven adored and celebrated.
And one of the jackals, well instructed and versed in policy lived with his friends among lions wolves and tigers. Having seen a powerful leader of deer within that forest they thought of some plan for catching him.
When the man, whose mind is devoted to virtue and truth looks upon his desires with dispassion then Death himself strangles him.
Those who are not satisfied with their positions, those that have been insulted out of vanity and those whose servants were forcibly taken away by others; those that had lost all they possessed through cupidity, those that were angry or afraid; those that had fled for fear of the enemy, those proud men that have suffered loss in consequence of having renounced wealth (for religious purposes), those desirous of gaining great riches but deprived them of what they already possess on account of want of proper means, those afflicted with pain who wait anxiously for some calamity which may destroy themselves as well as those who hide under cover of pretended friendship, these people, whatever be their actions, always serve you.
The men, who are versed in the difference between high and low qualities of all things which have their beginning, middle or end; who know for certain that they cannot be acquired by those who are not born as Brahmans;
Cutting off the standard of Adhiratha's son, he began to pierce with his arrows Suta and horse.
O king, having heard all this and also seen the Parthas defeated by trickery; I have now come here for your information.
Then that highly powerful monkey, severing the cords, jumped up with great impetuosity and began to roar.
While the charioteer was saying this, Makaraketu (Karna) thus spoke to him "O son of Daruka, do not turn back my car. I shall never abandon you as long as I am alive in battle."
And that hero, guilty of the worst sin, and who was capable of being easily killed in battle by me alone (but now) protected by his charioteer.
I shall dry up the water in this Kuru lake by my ascetic austerities. My father-in-law and mother-inlaw, going away from here for living in forest, will be engaged with their services; therefore Yudhishthira's body of flesh can be dried (by me).
As a calf seeks its mother among the thousand kine, even so do good works follow their author.
Even a worm, abandoning his vital airs and attaining that high state (of emancipation), acquires Brahman. This is the highest goal of life which is called Brahma in this world; it can be acquired with difficulty as Mahendra has said.
He who does not see what Rāma sees, and he whom Răma does not behold is a reproach in the eyes of all people; even one's own self condemn him.
The Panchalas headed by Dhrishtadyumna rushed against the son of Ganga, while Yudhishthira and others protected Dhristaketu.
Having said this, the king quickly made ready his car and all other articles for journeying. And having thus arranged everything he ordered that they might be sent away wherever they pleased;
And trees that grow in forests, and those which are adorned with flowers; the Kadamba tree of large branches; the bull which seeks his mate amongst cows, and Earth decked out with grasses and creepers.
The two brothers, having fallen asleep on the Earth like common men and with only their natural beauty (without that of gods), appeared as Asvinis.
We should fight with him, and if defeated we shall have no cause for regret. All the kings of this world are under Yudhishthira's control."
Whether rich or poor, whether miserable or happy, one who is without fault and he who has faults are equally entitled to the same end.
Then wounded by Samvarta, the son of Kshemavridha, who had never been defeated in battle and whose horses were fleet as the wind was pained with arrows shot from Sambhu's bow.
Seeing him incapable of resistance and their countenances were overwhelmed with grief. They then sought his protection saying, “O highly powerful one! be our son."
That combat, in which there was no use of weapons and which took place between the two parties with their knees as the sound of bells and heads as maces.
And one of them, raising up her arms and turning round in circles on the ground, seeing the face of a dead person, was seized with stupefaction.
Galava, having said this and accompanied by Suparna (Garuda), took the horses as well as the maiden with him and went to Vishvamitra.
Listen, therefore, how the king acts in this way. Alone and without any help he is following virtue for his own good."
But that sinful act has been performed by those high-souled ones, the Panchalas and the sons of Draupadi or Karna himself. I do not know whether these men are all sinless in their actions.
That virtuous descendant of the Kashi race, ruling this earth for a long time was defeated in battle by all those enemies that came with Vitta and Havya.
Kings are worshipped by men; they may forsake their wives and sons. The acquiring of friends, the making gifts, sweet speech, vigilance, purity these form a mighty source of prosperity for kings. Always be careful in all your acts, O son of Mandhatri."
And striking at sixteen, twenty and thirty Parikshit with his arms he began to devour them like Garuda (the king of birds) when enraged devours serpents.
Then he discharged his arrows at Karna, and also shafts furnished with the wings of Garuda's feathers; as well as various kinds of yugas; as also elephants; horses; men dead or alive. The son of Sadravrata then knew that all these were useless when shot against him by himself weaponless.
This is the excellent speech of Vibhīşana. I did not accept it from ignorance, that was spoken by him on account of my attachment towards Kumbha and Prahasta; but this their destruction has taken place in consequence thereof and hence an awful grief assails me.
And with his various weapons and chariot, all those warriors (the Pandavas), who could not brook it began to press on the excellent car of Subhadra's son. Then that one having knowledge in arms and invincible in battle was pained by them; like clouds pressing down a mountain top he then raged against them.
The Wind said I shall tell you a little of the duty that is so conducive to human happiness, together with its faults and mysteries. Do you listen to me with rapt attention.
A Brahmana should not be blamed when he takes up arms in the three periods, viz., for self-protection and saving his own order of life or for restraining wicked people who do not observe their vows.
Vasudeva said : There is no one in this world, not even on the field of battle who can shoot an arrow like Partha with his bow.
I have described at length the various characteristics of Rajas. What has been said is true and all that you hear from me about their behaviour (in this world) will be proved by experience in future lives also, if one knows these qualities he becomes freed from every attachment with them.
Vivashvat said : You shall get whatever you want. I will give you seven and five kinds of food every day.
Those men, who drink milk and clarified butter in the forest of Dvaita, become king.
Therefore, O foremost of men, remain at the gate with your weapon drawn and in a posture ready for battle until you have gained access into that city which has been hitherto inaccessible. Then summon me by shouting aloud "O mighty armed one, come here," after which I shall slay this Rākşasa."
Having thus instructed his sons and Sītā, Raghava's father, the king Daśaratha set out for Indraloka on a car.
Dhritarashtra said O son of Pandu, touch me again with your hand and embrace me. I am still alive through the remembrance of you only, o you having eyes like lotus leaves.
The sons of the blind king were all brought here by me with Trigavata (Trigarta), who is armed with maces and other weapons, as also many warriors.
The king should always be told of his faults. He is the lord of all subjects, and kings check those who are guilty in this way, as a hunter chases an animal with nets.
O you, the foremost of beings, it is yourself that creates and destroys all things; your nature is destructible as well as indestructible. Yourself are eternal without beginning or end.
Kākutstha, having for his aid the foremost of monkeys will speedily come hither. And subduing you in battle he shall remove your grief.'
Thus the lord of earth always enjoys happiness. By inspiring fear, one may make a coward submit; and by his deeds he may win over an hero. One can also gain wealth from those who are covetous for it or from them that have been given much wealth before (by others). Even so you shall hear another thing about me.
Know you in your heart that there is no truth or falsehood higher than this (the love of the husband for his wife and her for him). O my friend, do not doubt me.
And holding the bow, looking at that ornamented car of her husband, Janaki was delighted as if she had met with her lord.
O powerful one, he who worships the Lord of all creatures with due rites and ceremonies after knowing him as having forms in every creature, acquires great happiness.
O monarch, the night fight between Karna and Arjuna was like a fair combat lasting for many years.
I shall now recite, O foremost of men the Puranic story which describes how Khanda was destroyed.
O king, having heard the advice of that prince (Duryodhana) and obeying it in all respects Puruchana did what was commanded.
I do not disregard your intelligence, nor am I disregarding your prowess. But it is you who are under the influence of defeat.
While I am thus afflicted, Narada on both sides should speak of what is for my good and also that which may be beneficial to the people.
What is the highest of all riches which rests on what caste? Why does it change and become different again.
This is Pradyumna, who has come back frightened after having fled from that terrible battle. He will say-"Fie on him!" and not "Well done."
O descendant of Kākutstha, from that time the Pitris and Devas were constantly present with us; we used to partake of fruits which yielded no other fruit.
And a great desire of hearing the speech was felt by all the Kurus and that best among kings (the son of Kunti), endued with righteousness, in his assembly.
The Pandava army was unable to check Drona's career in battle and he slaughtered the Somaka host. Neither did they try to stop him, nor could any one of them withstand his force.
That devotee who discloses this supreme mystery, namely that he has full faith in Me, is certain to acquire an unbounded devotion for me.
Both those chariots, O monarch, and their horses together with the drivers were cut off by that shower of arrows shot from his bow.
Karna said I am the son of Adhiratha and you are the descendant of Radha. Why have you come here? Tell me what is your object, so that I may do it for you!
You praise the whole earth as belonging in its entirety, O king! But how can it be said that your stomach alone is equal (to all this)?
I am the lord of all Rakshasas and a terror to all gods. How can you call me helpless in spite of my being possessed by every sort of prowess?
The eighteen faults of a person, which were not mentioned before, are covetousness, enmity towards the world, ill will, malice and lying speech.
The king's displeasure and his orders, the fear of thieves are the bane of those who live in cities. But for forest dwellers there is no such danger; they can follow their own practices (of religion) without any difficulty.
While he was thus meditating with folded hands, the various deities came there separately.
The king said : I consider it as a great favour that you have asked for. Therefore, O hawk, today I will give you my flesh which is fit for eating and equal in weight with yours.
It is no wonder, O lord of the monkeys that you do not forget this excellent and good deed done by me.
Having thus performed his penance with energy and having acquired a knowledge of the Vedas, that ascetic who was possessed of excellent vows addressed
O you who are the destroyer of enemies, having studied that science as commanded by you I have gone into a forest for leading an ascetic life.
And the field of battle, filled with cars and troops rushing on like the wind itself; and furnished with standards decked out in gold and jewels.
Then Subala's son was slain by Pandu's, the left arm severed and his life blood spouted forth.
O best of the Bharata race, cutting off into three parts each of those arrows shot by Ashvatthaman and resembling masses of clouds.
That man who is respected by all, that man who has a straight and upright figure like the support of an arch or column; he whose words are well said, goes even among the celestials.
Thus wounded by Bhishma, the mighty bowman and destroyer of foes. O king! became very angry in battle like snakes that had been touched with a foot.
Then, with joined hands and bowed down in humility, that lord of the thunderbolt said these words which would remove his fears.
Those, who know that the Supreme Soul is of three forms and has six attributes as also are conversant with his infinite power.
I shall today remove your warlike spirit from the field of battle." Having said this, that red-eyed Rakshasa who was a terror to foes.
Seeing his sword thus cut off, he took up a huge mace and hurled it at Sahadeva. That weapon too proved futile as the former was soon reduced to dust on account of that shaft discharged by Arjuna.
Having the touch of Indra's thunderbolt, and having a splendour like that of Yama's rod, blazing in battle, (that army) began to lick up all your troops on every side.
One should not see any opening in another; one can himself enter through a small hole. Like the tortoise drawing back his limbs, one should protect his own weakness and cover up all openings of attack (on him). If one begins anything without having properly arranged it out beforehand, he may fall into great difficulties from which there is no escape for years to come.
Markandeya said : O king, I am willing that you should always do the acts of charity and virtue.
You have said truly that it is not proper for a king to kill his messenger. But still he must be killed, and means therefore should be taken (to destroy him).
And in a short time they made many reservoirs, of various shapes and having the sea for their model.
Having said this, the night-ranger looked intently with a frown on his brow. He saw in front of him an excellent Sala tree having its leaves all torn and cut off (by Rāma).
Gradually the king, who was being waited upon by attendants with showers of fragrant flowers and perfumes, lost his senses on account of cold.
One desirous of his own good should exert himself with zeal for the purpose of either collection or expenditure.
You are holding many a dead body, with the head cut off and tied by noose; you also have always on your chariot, O king, those great car-warriors who lay their weapons down.
When you were desirous of getting back the kingdom, O Karna and when relying on Shakuni's dice, your virtue was gone.
Thereupon those two subduers of foes, the son of Drona and Bhima began to strike one another with numerous thousands of shafts.
This excellent bow, that was as beautiful as the Indragopachitra and had a bright appearance like that of fire. It belonged to king Yudhishthira and it was presented by him in Virata's kingdom.
That assembly was adorned with the beautiful ornaments of a sacrifice and that the attendants were like so many serpents; and they appeared as if united by their vows.
The celestials then bowed down before the Self-born (Brahma) and said, "The special merit of those who are engaged in making up for their past misdeeds by means of a particular sort of penances is that they can rise from sleep with rapt attention."
Then a dreadful battle was fought, capable of causing hair stand erect and resembling that between the celestials and Danavas.
He who, having renounced all friendship and flattery and praise of others in his heart, goes about clad only in a piece of cloth or half naked is happy. Such men are learned indeed!
Then approaching king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti and saluting him first that descendant of Suta thus spoke.
Arjuna said O Brahmana, meditate upon me in your mind and speak these benedictions. By your favour I wish to enter into the army of those difficult (to be conquered).
As you were thus endeavouring, a quarrel arose between the two parties. Thus do all doubts disappear when arguments are used in support of one's own opinions and against those of others.
Even those who are always devoted and engaged in the performance of Shraddha, sacrifices and other religious rites become subject to covetousness; so they eat one another up.
I myself bear the waters. O Vasava, it is I who discharge them (into the ocean). It is by me that all three worlds are scorched and by me they are also illumined.
O son of Bharata, you have been purified by your acts; therefore do you now with virtue and penances satisfy the Brahmanas.
Beholding Bhimasena armed with a mace, your son that chastiser of foes (Dushasana) taking up his terrible club began to strike the former.
Thereupon, O king a loud war-cry was raised by the Kurus on all sides. But Bhima did not yield to that lion-like cry of those swift warriors.
O Sanjaya, tell me who were the heroes that stood near my son when his army was on fire and he himself was burning in a great conflagration.
And then those two warriors, striking each other with stones and pieces of wood for a short while in that battle. Then Bhima caught Shalya by the arms; whereat he fell down on earth struck dead (by him). Thus did that foremost man among men kill his enemies; but it is wonderful that although killed thus, yet Shalya lived still.
These qualities of self-control, truthfulness, sincerity and forbearance should be practised by you. By following these virtues in your life you will certainly attain immortality for ever; they are the true indications of virtue, which is eternal; if followed carefully they will confer on one all sorts of happiness. Truthfulness, forgiveness, honesty, contentment, freedom from malice or envy, patience, tranquillity, benevolence towards creatures, absence of desire, hatred and pride, modesty, power of bearing pain with fortitude, intelligence, steadfastness of purpose, mercy, and being free from any sort of enmity—these constitute a man's duty as declared by me before. If observed duly, those duties lead men to heaven at their death.
That friend, who is always afraid of calamities and does not suffer from any misfortune in prosperity, should be considered as a true friend.
Hearing these words of her husband, the illustrious Kunti was greatly aggrieved. Without getting into a boat she went away with all those sons of hers on foot along that best of rivers called Ganga.
Saudasa said If you are under my control, if the king has already accepted your submission; then speak out truly as regards yourself.
Vidura, therefore, influenced by Shakuni's advice, still continued to follow his son. It was with the intention of obtaining victory that he asked Yudhishthira for a game at dice.
I desire also to see the Panchala princess, ever devoted to virtue. Bhima of dreadful prowess is dearer than life itself to me and so are Arjuna resembling Indra himself as well as the twins Nakula and Sahadeva like Death incarnate; but I do not wish to remain here any longer. This is truly my intention."
There were five brothers, all righteous and endued with prowess. They resembled Indra in person or Gopala; they had red armour on their bodies and carried banners into battle. Those warriors who came there for the purpose of rescuing Pandu's son from Drona stopped those heroes (the sons of Kekaya) when these approached him.
You have been ruled by me as a friend; do you obey my command. Protect the subjects virtuously, there is nothing else for you to say." What more shall I speak? O highly powerful lord of Rākşasas! Do you worship that god who governs this world and who was born in Ikșvaku's race. He should be worshipped day after day even by Vasava with Indra himself.” Having said these words Bhișma replied to them saying “so it will be".
After Rama had left the hermitage, he spoke thus in grief to Sumitra's son;
You have, by giving me your hand in marriage as well as by performing the Agni-Sakshya ceremony and making promises with true heart, made yourself my husband.
After the expiry of fifteen years, king Yudhishthira was afflicted with severe pain and became greatly depressed.
Thereupon, Karna having slain his steeds and also the charioteer of this king by means of straight-cleaved shafts sped off with great rapidity brought him down in Yama's abode.
Janamejaya said : O descendant of Kuru, thus did the Brahmanas live in disguise as fishes. What feats then (of prowess) they achieved after that?
Smell is a sense-object, and it should be known as pertaining to earth. The qualities that are considered superior in all creatures (viz., purity of body, sweetness etc.), belong also to the five elements when they form themselves into organised bodies.
These and many others, O Sanjaya have sacrificed their lives in battle. What do you think of those that have not been conquered by the foe?
In the western region are Jaratkaru, Jaratkārvã and Pulastya; in Menaka is Orna as also Tumburu with Rambha.
O foremost of men, I am highly pleased with you for your great devotion. Therefore do accept this excellent weapon from me."
And Kritavarman was consumed by that dreadful conflagration which, coming suddenly and resembling the fire of universal dissolution.
Therefore, after having properly reflected on this subject and controlling his desire by patience should a king seek for sovereignty. One's own self is truly known when one seeks the kingdom of heaven;
O king, the citizens also in large numbers desired (Arjuna) and he was accompanied by numerous cars of various sorts.
Their minds, their bodies and the knowledge of men are all unstable. Even if a man is capable or not suspectable he can be conquered by one hundred persons only.
The person, who protects a warrior in battle and the persons protected by him have one common path of safety.
Then Arjuna cut-off the standards with their strings of bells and also his chariots that had all four wheels destroyed. He then killed all those horses, drivers, foot soldiers and warriors who were on them as well as arrows, bows and weapons and he broke many more such arms before they could be used by Suta's son.
O you having long arms, this destruction of the monkeys and Rākşasas is come by chance.
O foremost of Rakshasas, the king (Ravana) took out seventy-three arrows from his quiver and fixed them on his bow-string.
What enemy can be victorious in battle whose side is occupied by those, who have Rama as their partisan and Janardana (Krishna) for their counsellor?
Vaishampayana said : The heroes saw Vishvamitra, Kanva and the ascetic Narada, all going away in disguise under the leadership of Sariya.
He who drinks the blood of a living creature is called a lake of blood. That person, however, who eats flesh in proper manner and with due rites, does not sin at all.
Hearing the sound of those and also, O king, that loud roar of Bhimasena.
Then that army of the Pandavas, which was like a sea and which advanced very fast with its numerous elephants, horses, cars and men and which encountered many enemies on all sides.
Those who are satisfied with food go away, those who do not like any kind of food also depart. The men that have no clothes on and the women without dresses too start for other countries.
Behold, O Karna, the terrible sight which is calculated to strike terror into every one's heart and make all hair stand erect.
Loud cries of one another were heard by fathers, brothers and maternal uncles.
Having said this, the son of Drona went away from that great camp of the Parthas without any fear and with his face towards them.
The pure wind, that is the vehicle of all odours and which comes from the sky, has strength; therefore its touch forms one of his attributes.
Hearing the words of that one, ever cheerful and eager for my welfare, will Dasharatha's prowess grow.
In what family one is born, or in which order of life he lives as a Kshatriya (warrior), and under what circumstances he earns his livelihood, these are the three things that should be considered by any body.
The great Yogins, who are conversant with the changes of words say that this is an excellent subject. He who knows this Yoga understands everything and attains immortality.
The swan (Damayanti) came there and sat down at the foot of that hill. Transformed into a human being, he thus spoke to Damayantri-
Markandeya said : The learned Brahmana thus addressed Dharmavyada, “O best of men, do you tell me how I may acquire the knowledge that is necessary for acquiring good character?
The two worlds of the gods and Asuras are seen in this world. Hear, O Partha, I have described fully what is called Daivam (god) that which is not called so by men who know nothing about its origin or course; those people also do not understand purity and morality and truthfulness as they should be understood.
O monkey, because of my misfortune you shall have the opportunity of seeing me in distress for a short time.
Then the illustrious Vishnu, who was himself of old time and from whom all things have originated said these words.
O you of immeasurable prowess, even when I had thus spoken before, it behoves you now also to help me in this work.
I know that country, O lord. There are there halāyas and saktis, gadas, Prasthas, shields, swords, lances.
Then those two mighty carwarriors, Drona and Karna, began to cut down the retreating troops with many shafts.
O mother, this calamity has been brought about by my sinful self; for Rama is fit only with happiness. Alas! I shall not be able to bear it that the people should blame me and call life of no value.
O descendant of Bharata, is the princess Draupadi who has been married with her sons and husband ever devoted in following truth? Is she still happy like before or has any misfortune befallen upon her.
What man of an unstable mind would ever place his confidence in such a one? Therefore, do you perform all your duties by the help of direct perception.
Hence the five cardinal points, O king, have been named Yama. The region of the north, which is celebrated as above all other regions and belongs to Prajapati (Brahman), has also been called by that name."
Thus did ten thousand years pass away for those who were ever engaged in the duties of their cities and also with the desire of acquiring merit.
Then, O king, the handsome Angada and that subduer of foes (Rāma), having saluted those old monkeys as also their host, spoke thus in words fraught with sense.
Hearing these words, the Raksasas were worked up with rage and they began to bind his legs with old pieces of cloth.
Yudhishthira said All the people address us as "Blessed, Blessed," but no one is so unhappy among men as we are.
O you that are like Indra in prowess and strength, do not look at the faces of others. I have already done what is proper for me (to do).
Having given up your body, which is the abode of all creatures and also which burns like a fire in battle; having given away your life for acquiring religious merit you ought not seek any other way of salvation.
O king, in that battle they mangled each other's horses and men. Thus many times did those kings slaughter one another.
Then having deposited his mind, understanding and senses in the hands of that one (the cow), Vasu's younger brother addressed him with a smile.
Then Bharadvāja, smilingly said unto Bharata, I know you are well-pleased. You have been gratified by me in some way or other.
I shall follow, behind you who have been deprived of your car, Drona gone up to heaven; and Karna and Shalya both mighty bowmen as also Vrishasena endued with great prowess; the son of Subala named Shakuni and Jayadratha ruler over Sindhua. And all those brothers led by Dushashana like my own self. And that powerful one Dashagriva (Ravana); and Vikrantin called Daushasana. Lakshmana too his two sons together with thousands upon thousand others belonging to me or on our side.
O king, I was a Chandal by birth. After having acquired the status of royalty (by deceit) my end has been disastrous."
One, however, who is endued with virtue and knowledge of the scriptures in this world commits sinful deeds by inadvertence. The king should know that it is Virtue which compels men to commit sin through carelessness.
I wish, when it is dark and I am in haste, this path may be marked by Lakşmaņa with his cloth.
O Rama, the ascetic Vishvamitra of pious conduct being burnt by a bolt from heaven and transformed into an outcast took compassion on me. And with pity for me that highly energetic and virtuous sage spoke these words- "O mighty prince! what work have you come here? By virtue of this curse you had been reduced in your form to that of an outcast."
Drona then pierced him with arrows and the latter, having his bow broken in twain by that shot of Drona's arrow, fell down on earth from his chariot like a star falling out of heaven.
Let the sacrificial ground be made on the banks of Sarayu in the north. And let peace and prosperity increase according to ordinance and custom.
These boats have been made by the Rishis of righteous acts. Knowing that Bhagavan has come here, we have speedily arrived at this place.
O son of Pritha, a man who is not restrained by restraint himself falls into the company of those that are without self-restraint. He never sees them or they him.
No one else, except the husband of Sachi himself or Kiriti (Arjuna), will be able to fight with me in battle being angry.
The charioteer said : O ascetic lady, when these two sisters had come near the spot where their brother was engaged in his penances and he could not be seen by them.
O king, I wish for a long time that this wicked Vrikodara should be slain by me. This has been my constant desire since a very long time."
Then he, assuming a fierce asceticism, stood on the top of that mountain having two arms and great energy resembling the sun in effulgence.
When that dreadful battle between the best of heroes and Rakshasas was thus raging, Partha suddenly heard a sound from his conch Panchajanya.
That understanding which is covered by ignorance and considers vice as virtue, O son of Pritha, that is called the dark one.
That beautiful lady, who was gifted with the power of assuming any form at will and whose mind ran after every object of desire, stole away all creatures as also their hearts.
O king, worship the seasons and other months as you would Shakra (Indra), for they are worthy of adoration by all.
That virtuous king established his own kingdom, and those of many other kings who were living in various countries.
How, O Brahmana can a person of my description who is leading the domestic mode of life and engaged in providing for his own maintenance be able to perform acts like these (for others)?
Thus struck in the vital parts with that terrible dart of desire, Rama does not enjoy happiness; even as an elephant enjoys no delight when pierced by a lion.
Angirasa said : Let the Brahman-koota be impure, let dogs and cats live with it. May he who has taken your Pushkara (wealth) prove ungrateful towards you!
O best of kings, I have told you all this that was done by the Brahmana Upamanu. Having bowed down his head with humility before God and then said these words
From the inner apartment, there came forth a fragrance of lotuses; and that sweet-smelling breeze was as if Sītā's breath.
And he was the equal in battle of his brothers, and also of their sons; and also of Ashvapati king of Madra.
Then the king, having conferred that kingdom upon Dhritarashtra and Vidura, Yudhishthira happily lived.
Then while the Pandava warriors were thus engaged, that mighty car-warrior of the Kuru host began to advance with great speed, causing a tremendous uproar in his car.
Why did you not restrain me who was carrying the load on my back? Had I done an act which is improper, why have you not prevented me before.
When his brother had been slain, the son of Suta assuming courage and placing himself in front like a snake taking hold of two fangs began to assail that mighty car-warrior.
Having defeated them and having made a treaty with the king, he took from all of them riches and jewels.
What have we got by the asceticism of that miserable monkey, Hanumān? The invincible Rāma is staying; and so are Sugrīva along with Lakşmana.
How can one who is as strong and powerful in battle as the mighty-armed Bhimasena, how can even those immortals succeed in defeating him?
The Pandavas, O king and the mighty car-warrior Karna all rejoiced greatly at this exploit of Subhadra's son.
Thereupon, approaching him (Sudama), he took hold of his feet and threw him down on the ground; and catching up that one resembling an animal in agitation as soon as it was thrown down,
O Rama, formerly Vāli had me expelled from my kingdom. And I being exiled am still in despair at his harsh words; and therefore have I been brought under subjection by the powerful (Ravana).
And her mouth resembling a bimba fruit, and furnished with eyes like lotus leaves, hair on the forehead, lips of red colour and nails resembling those of the pigeon; shone forth as the moon emerging from Rahu's jaws.
He, who feeds the sacred fire with due rites and observances is a great purifier. All the Vedas are established in these three fires of sacrifices, O lord of kings.
The senses of touch, taste and smell are the tongue. Hearing is the two ears; while eyesight is form or colour. It should be understood that all these do not exist in the soul which is above nature.
When the mighty-armed Duryodhana heard this, he said to that Brahmana-"Do not fear.” Then he saw where all the weapons of those high-souled sons of Pandu were kept. The king Yudhishthira accompanied by Krishna went there but was unable either to enter or leave it.
Because, O Indra the creatures are in their wombs and because they dislike wind. Those men who do not pour libations on a burning fire of Havyavaha (Agni).
The highly effulgent Kākutstha had seen the noble Janaka. He wished to confer his daughter on Raghava,
This marvellous narrative has been told by the ascetic. It is an excellent work, it contains all that can be asked of a great poem; and for its sweetness of sound, it stands at the head of all songs sung in this world.
Dhundhumara said : Let a Shudra be born who will not pay his debts and let him enjoy alone all the wealth of those, from whom he has stolen.
If, therefore, you are capable of displaying your power of illusion by creating a delusion in the minds of others; what is there which may not be destroyed by that same power?
Having promised (to protect the Pandavas) while accepting from them their kingdom, O monarch, Karna did not slay the heroic sons of Pritha led by Dushashana when they had become carless. Satyaki also kept his promise in protecting Bhima and Arjuna who were engaged in fulfilling a previous vow taken by him (Arjuna).
I blame the Pandavas, who are highly powerful and who are all heroes of great strength in battle; for they allow their illustrious queen Draupadi to be afflicted with misery.
I have performed many acts for the benefit of my creatures. O son of Kunti, by means of illusion shall I now hide myself from them with their own selves!
Then, O Partha, when the battle became fierce and tumultuous Vrikana (Karna) that foremost of carwarriors met with Bhima in combat. The highly powerful son of Kuru showered a downpour of arrows on his brother-in-law but he was unable to penetrate through him like rain failing upon rock.
Vaishampayana said : Having heard these words of Abhimanyu and having been pleased with them, the friends (of Arjuna) retired into their own tents. When night came they entered in great contentment the Sabha of Virata.
How were the creatures created? And why have they been divided into four orders and castes? What is purity, what impurity for them; and how should their conduct be regulated.
That man, who is always ready with his weapons and who does not fear his enemies when he has been wounded by them in battle, should be killed; such a person has sharp teeth.
The visible, the invisible and the light of knowledge are said to be in a trinity. These three constitute what is called eye-sight; the understanding constitutes their third component part.
If those two (Drona and Karna) can subdue the celestials, what need have I of grief?
Why should I not speak of those Vrishnis and Andhakas who always envy Satyaki, Baladeva and others?
The courtezan Pingala, having been refused by her lover (the Brahmana), was very much aggrieved; but on reflection she adopted a course of conduct which brought about peace.
That which is fraught with pain for the people should not be done by persons conversant with knowledge. O elder brother of Lakshmana, I have heard your words full of virtue and reason; therefore do you listen to what I say in reply to them.
Ascending the tower of wisdom, he weeps for men who are not worthy of his tears. Remaining in this world as if standing on a mountain peak, he looks down upon those that have weak understanding.
O sinless one, why do you inflict a fruitless punishment upon me who am so kind and compassionate towards all creatures; devoted and not in the least partial?
Thereupon, O descendant of Raghu, the celestials and Asuras began to churn it. The best mountain Manthara entered into the nether regions.
The sixteen elements, having the Unmanifest for their essence and forming my body also exist in me. I am not conscious of them separately though they form one part of myself. And this great soul then revolve with its twenty-fifth portion which is called Pratibha (cognisance). It shines forth as pure and holy; but it exists among those that are impure and unholy on account of association. O king, even so a person whose understanding has been purified by knowledge becomes shorn of all senseless acts, although he may be stained with ignorance or foolishness because of his intercourse with ignorant persons.
The truthful man should abstain from falsehood. He, who is under the influence of desire and anger and malice, cannot act thus; but he who has subdued all his senses can so control himself as not to utter a lie even in jest or for any good object that may be before him.
And once more, O chief of kings, the spies have reported that in order to achieve victory and destroy his enemies the son of Suta has made a fresh resolution.
The wealth that has been acquired by the means of justice, should be protected with care and exertion; for it is a source both of virtue and worldly benefit.
The man who sells his son for money, or gives away a daughter with the expectation of life in return for payment (in kind), sinks into seven terrible hells situated on the banks of death.
Then, O son of Kunti, the king (Yudhishthira), with a view to kill him who was most dear to his heart and whose sacrificial fire had been lighted by himself, hurled another weapon at Karna.
Vasudeva is the highest of all beings; he is, indeed, the mouth of Brahma. Truth and knowledge are his sacrifice, self-control (is also) a part of that sacrifice, as well as patience and simplicity.
O Sanjaya, it is not by one virtuous act that we can attain happiness in this world. We are unable to rescue the son of Dhritarashtra from his present plight.
Desire, anger and covetousness are the three doors of hell; therefore one should renounce these.
He who, O Shini's son, forsakes his own body in battle for the sake of a friend; or he that gives away Earth and all other creatures unto twice-born persons shall be considered as equal (to Narayana himself).
(And) he again and again roamed over the earth, tearing it up with his horns or trunks; then suddenly turning round on one side began to scoop out a hole in my stomach.
Then Shalya, worked up with anger and smiling all the while pierced that son of Madri in his heart with a sharp arrow.
Thereupon Dhananjaya discharged a shower of shafts at those monkeys. That discharge was like the flight of locusts or other insects in various shapes and colours,
And I did all that without a thought of my own. Therefore, with the exception of my person and head which were thus saved by you.
As the gods and ascetics, accompanied by their drums began to perform in honour of Rāma. He was highly pleased at it; he stood there as if struck with wonder. In a moment fourteen thousand Karmarupa (shape-changing) Rakşasas headed by Khara and Dūşaņa were slain by sharp arrows discharged by Rama in that great encounter.
Bhishma said By making gifts, by observing penances and by performing sacrifices one should always seek his own welfare. The four principal orders of men who desire the prosperity of themselves as also of others,
Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma (Brahman), indulged in anger and censured the gods also as well as virtue.
O descendant of Kuru, in the city of Dvaravati I formerly sat with a certain Brahmana. That one was greatly afflicted by those other Brahmanas and therefore he spoke thus to me-What is the fruit of serving the Brahmanas? What do you say about their lordship both here and there (in heaven)?
Having offered oblations of clarified butter and having satisfied the Brahmanas with profuse presents, king Shakuntala gave Bharata a hundred thousand coins made of pure gold which were equal in value to four hundred thousands kanyas. These were studded on every side by excellent gems and pearls and rubies; they had been sent from Yupa whose pillar was one hundred cubits high and who stood at the junction of three worlds surrounded by celestials as well as the regenerate ones called Saintri (Brahmana) and those belonging to the class of Deva Rshis. Those beautiful coins were also adorned with various sorts of jewels and precious stones and gems, horses of the breed of white steeds, elephants and buffaloes, sheep cattle, milk cows all accompanied by their calves and progeny, villages houses fields and other articles of wealth both movable and immovable,
Therefore, O king of kings do you also duly worship it as directed by me. I have already described this subject in many ways; what else shall we hear?
Ashtaka said : How does a householder acquire virtue? In what way is it acquired by an ascetic living in the woods or by one who has renounced all worldly attachments, and lives on alms given him as gifts of charity by others.
Other Rākşasas, eating those persons of large and full breasts, who were wearing yellow robes and were well fed with excellent food, ran about in great haste. And other dreadful-looking carnivorous creatures ate human flesh. O king, there assembled thousands of millions (of Rakshasa) possessing fierce forms and enormous strength; they were greatly delighted and perfectly satisfied at that vast feast.
O slayer of Madhu, you are the refuge for those who have no friends in this world and whose number is not known.
Then those two elephants, excited with rage and inflamed by lust, began to fight furiously. Their trunks were broken as they fought; like the great elephants that are seen in a cow-pen when one of them is wounded or pierced with the tusk (by another).
"This dreadful work has been done by us, for the sake of our cruel acts with Rakshas." Saying this many people lay down in various places.
Then the greatly powerful Kumbhakarna, being exceedingly enraged and taking up a mace, began to slay all creatures.
And having stopped the showers of arrows with his shield, he (Karna) took away from Kunti's son his head adorned with earrings and looking beautiful.
He, who insults a Brahmana in his house or outside it is sure to go down into the hell.
The descendant of Bhrigu, having arrived at the hermitage, began with his wife Renuka (to live there).
As the desires of each individual arose, Vyasa gave him wealth. He was a great giver and always pleased with virtue.
The hairs of the Rakshasas body began gradually to drop down and the blood began to flow in streams.
One who desires prosperity should exert with energy. And dividing the time and place, one may ascertain whether his acts will be productive of good or bad; but these two viz., time and place are uncertain.
He protected the entire Earth with his matchless prowess. There was no one who could bear him any ill-will and none of them desired evil towards him.
With an iron weapon that is soft, capable of cutting through the heart and taking away one's tongue. Wash your mouth first with water (and then) spit it out."
Thereat that greatly powerful hero, the son of Duryodhana fearlessly struck his antagonist with great lightness. But all those blows were fruitless and there arose a mighty wonder among beholders.
As long as a person does not see his own face in the mirror, he considers himself better than others.
Seeing the palace of Vāraņavat, in which they had lived for many years, burnt down all at once with its inmates and servants, those people began to lament.
Having accepted all those presents, and being accompanied by his friends and followers, Bharata received the messengers with due honours.
Men who are cowards become brave and those that think themselves as heroes, turn out to be cowardly. In the time of universal dissolution (i.e., in the last days) no one has confidence in another person.
Thus, O king, the heart of a Brahmana who has his mind fixed on some object or other is always gratified by all the celestials.
Then like the lord Indra showering clouds on the Nagas, Bhagadatta covered Dhananjaya with a downpour of arrows.
Seeing the monkey-leader, that Rākşasa without heeding him began laughing like a cloud which has been deprived of rain.
O son, I have been saved by you, a high-souled and virtuous person like the Brahmana Kacha who had been rescued from death by Ashvatthaman.
Hearing of the installation ceremony (of Krishna) and also hearing that those Daityas had been killed, I have become exceedingly delighted.
Having gone there, the mighty-armed Bharata, who was highly excited with wrath addressed Satrughna and all his counsellors.
The wife of Naga said : O learned Brahmanas, this king has gone for the purpose of driving Surya's chariot. He will return in seven or eight days without doubt.
The bodies, O Bharata, of those men who had been slain by me, being thus united together appeared as one single body.
The king has heard from his father how he should behave. Yet the son is not like what the father had said about him; and though born of a virtuous wife, yet by nature he proves himself cruel.
A man who wants riches performs the Shraddha of Dhankama. One, that wishes for wealth and prosperity should perform it on Pushya day.
Do what I desire you to do, O Vrishni's son. So that the promise of Arjuna may be fulfilled and so also my wishes may not remain unaccomplished."
Why does not he, who is like a child and whom I cherish as my son, act according to the words that are beneficial for his brother?
O best of the Bharata race, Arjuna is incapable (of withstanding) even Shakuni in battle.
This Rākṣasa, whom I had wounded with a shaft and by whose agency was I dragged away from the asylum in the form of an animal.
He said "Be blessed, be safe” and then went away. O powerful one, the Pandavas along with Draupadi also left for their city (Indraprastha).
Yudhishthira said I do not see the son of Radha, that mighty car-warrior. Nor also those two high-souled brothers, viz., Yuyutsu and Uttamauja who are equal in battle prowess with Arjuna himself; as also all other kings and princes killed by me on this field of battle for my sake!
O descendant of Bharata, being afraid of the curse and terrified by my father's words I have been unable to refuse those boons which are so difficult to obtain.
From wealth arises one's family; from wealth also virtue increases. O best of men, there is no world without it and the next world cannot be won by him who has none
And also the cows, and calves and beds. Then Rāma went away from Baksa's asylum. O king! It is heard that Dalmbya practised very severe austerities there.
He did not wish any longer for obtaining the wealth of others. The colour of his skin became very pale and he looked as if in a trance.
The self-create created in the beginning Dhātar, honoured of men. And Dhatár beget a son engaged in upholding all creatures;
Do not give way to the tongue. All that is uttered by it should be restrained by you with your mind. By restraining all evil thoughts and controlling them, do you perform Brahmacharya in purity of heart."
The song that I sing is pleasant, and the notes of my voice resemble those of a peacock. In fact, this music seems as if it were composed in the forests like any other forest melody.
From the fact of its being indestructible, it is said that a person who has this knowledge never begets any son. This man is called indestructible and immortal; but still death overtakes him.
These are my friends. They have removed all grief from me, and they protect me everywhere; they accompany me in going anywhere I like; they also stand by me when I stay at home.
And, O mighty monarch, for the sake of Sachi, that afflicter of foes (Indra) was asked by Mahendra (Vishnu), who had been duly prayed to by him.
The desire of beholding you is consuming me along with my younger brother, who are living in the forest. This advice from Yajnasena's daughter has given us great pain.
Kanika said : When they had gone away, the jackal with a cheerful heart began to eat up all that flesh (of Rama) alone.
The King said : O Brahmana, I am now without any fire (of desire); therefore let me go away. Alas! my race has been entirely destroyed by the sons of mine.
You should observe the vow I have told you of. After a year, they will be purified and their sins removed." No woman in my kingdom ever succeeded in approaching me while observing that vow.
O descendant of Bharata, defeated in that great battle by the son of Suta (Duryodhana), those five mighty car-warriors stood inactive as if they were deprived of their senses or as if they had lost all desire for victory.
How did that monkey-bannered one, filling the sky with his roars and creating a din by beating the trees, appear when he returned? Let them all look at Partha.
Then with his sharp arrows, Karna broke the showers of weapons. The wind then carried away all those arms in its impetuous course.
That highly powerful one (Abhimanyu), as if dancing in the battle, threw Vikarna's charioteer and horses from his car with his arrows.
As the fire within a room burns down everything in it, so does even little passion consume virtue and worldly profit.
These sharp arrows of Bhima, who are seen by the half-moon and which will surely destroy his enemies.
Do you, therefore, O grandfather act as your heart prompts you; and let it be such that our grandsons may live happily.
The gods and all the best of ascetics, Gandharvas, Vidhyadharas, snakes, Raksasa, Yakshas, Pannagas, human beings also with their wives went there.
But, O Purandara, it is through your ordinary intellect that you have acted thus; when I shall be the master of this universe then you will not speak so.
You are our father and you are also our mother. Indeed, we regard ourselves as your servants. Having been forsaken by you where shall we stay now?
Hearing Lakşmaņa's words, Rāma oppressed with grief and stupefied by sorrow proceeded himself towards the Godāvarī.
And mridangas and small cymbals, and drums of different kinds; also conchs with their loud notes, the sound produced by the Adambaras,
Then that foremost of smiters, Drona himself mounting on another car and reaching the entrance into their array advanced towards battle.
You are very dear and you have great prospects. O foremost of Rakshasas, in the many wars between the gods and Asuras (you) had protected them by forming various kinds of array with your friends.
Giving up your attachment for pleasure and putting aside sorrow, you do not yet perceive that the great one of purified soul is none else than yourself.
Persons of bad character are seen to assume the appearance of good men. Good people too, appear as if they belong to an inferior order. There is a great diversity in human nature; hence it becomes necessary for us to examine others and ourselves also.
O my child, do you protect the secret I have told you and also bring up my sons-in-law. Do this in a very skilful way."
Then Vrikodara, enraged with the Asuras sent them all to hell. With his help Bhima made the earth drenched in blood by slaughtering those heroes of Shura's army namely Yadu and Andhaka and Madrakas and Malavas.
In consequence of this, I see my preceptor lying on his bed made of arrows. Alas! the science (of arms) is a cheat; and strength and manliness are all empty words.
Bhishma said If one's wealth is lost or if his wife and children are taken away, or if a father dies. O king, he should not think that it is too much (to bear). He should only try to remove the grief which has entered into him.
Having bathed in the river, that one of mighty arms adorned his person with sandal paste. He then put on a new dress and stood facing towards the east, with folded hands.
Now, O king of the Gandhara country, it is your duty to do good to yourself and also to Gandhari. You should therefore grant me permission (to carry out my resolve).
As the thousand-eyed Indra with Sachi, so shall I take away Vaidehi alongwith Kākutstha and Lakşmaņa.
Balhika said : O twice-born one, the high-souled king of Kosala has heard that a second Svayamvara shall take place for Damayanti. It will be on Friday next in this very city named Ujjaini."
Hearing this, and moved by Sītā's injunctions (to follow Råma), Sumiträ's son followed the agitated Lakşmana in a spirit of friendship.
With sharp arrows and with iron-headed shafts, the crown of Kiritin (Arjuna) sent them all in a moment to that other world called death.
And his energy, strength and delight in battle were doubled. And desirous of destroying the enemy, Rāma's bow was also rendered more powerful than before.
O you of great effulgence, adorned with two ear-rings made of gold and looking exceedingly beautiful like the moon placed in the midst between Vishākhas.
Seeing the best of car-warriors, Adhiratha's son in battle deprived of his chariot, that foremost of men (Duryodhana), without waiting for the permission of others, stopped the progress of your son.
O son of Kunti, if you go in there you shall see nothing. No one can view these from the body that is mortal."
In the sixth day of the light fortnight, O Brahmana, men endued with wisdom laud that union which is sanctioned by Bala and Phalguna as well.
It behoves you not to disregard me, who am called Vikarna's nose. I have no grievance in my being deprived of this nose for the sake of Karna."
Then he hurled a broad-headed iron dart at Adhiratha's son. That dart, blazing in the sky and cut into seven pieces by Arjuna with his arrows; falling on earth was no more seen.
Dhritarashtra said : Alas! how miserable is his life and what a hard time he passes. O foremost of eloquent men, tell me whether there is any pleasure or happiness in it for him?
That chariot, being thus struck by the enemy's shafts appeared beautiful like a celestial car drawn in the sky by white steeds.
Sauti said : Brahmachari Chyavana begot on Sukanya, a son of great energy named Pramati.
O son, this is no difficult matter that the lord will destroy. In this world there are many persons who attain renown by forgiving those whom they should kill for their great virtues and power.
O descendant of the Bharata race, that great bowman and slayer of foes (Karna), laughing a little cut him with ten arrows.
The son of Kunti (Yudhishthira) then tied the Kapalika into a noose and thus delighted all his subjects. Thereupon Bhima challenged Malin, who resembled Vritra himself in appearance.
Here stands that foremost of all virtuous men, Yudhishthira the just and conqueror of hostile cities in battle.
Thus protected by the immeasurably energetic Partha, Dhrishtadyumna then discharged at that moment a blazing shaft for gaining victory.
The great king should always wear excellent robes. He is not, however, wearing any now on his person!
If, after I have again entered the forest and lived there for some time, that tree, bearing flowers and fruit does not slay me.
O Sanjaya, tell me whether those two heroic Panchala princes are alive or not. And also relate to me what great feat they performed in the battlefield (today).
Vaishampayana said : Having heard the words of those ascetics, Pandu was filled with grief. Knowing that he had committed a sin by his curse on himself and being afraid for his own life, he spoke thus in private to Kunti, that illustrious lady who was his wife. Do you exert yourself as much as possible to get an offspring (from your husband).
Having lived in the forest for a long time, that one of rigid vows and self-control attained to heaven by subsisting on fruits and roots.
O great king, the weapons they hurled were fearful and when those two heroes enraged resembled Death himself.
Then he sent again against Drona's troops another seven hundred and one thousand men, all invincible in battle.
By observing a fast on the day of full moon in this month, one becomes adored as Narayana and acquires success.
Then taking up another excellent and strong bow, that highly powerful hero took up his arrows.
Having constructed a boat made of patience and the five elements, with waters as her current, (and having taken) wisdom for his oarsman, he crossed over those perilous regions.
O amiable lady, let us go there. Come on slowly; do not grieve yourself! He is virtuous and self-controlled in his conduct of life as well as truthful and the ruler of men (in knowledge).
The king, who is wise and brave can protect his kingdom with the help of a stick. He cannot be protected by one without either knowledge or power or bravery.
That best of the Bharata race, thus living in harmony with all three objects of life and respecting his friends as if they were equal with himself.
He who is engaged in solitude, the abstainer from food at certain seasons and whose speech, body and mind are all under restraint; he who always practises meditation and Yoga, living in celibacy.
Shyena said O lord of men, if you have any affection for me, then take out the flesh from your own body and give it to my son.
Seeing you, people look at the sun. The sin of Brahmanicide is yours for your own expiation.
How, however, is it possible for me today in the way you have described? I will do what may be beneficial and agreeable to those monkeys.
Vaishampayana said : Having arrived at his city, which was like the abode of Mahendra (Indra), Yayati entered that palace and brought in Devayani. With her permission he took Vrishaparva's daughter to a cottage within an Ashoka grove; there she lived with one thousand maidservants attended upon by Sharmistha (another daughter) who had been ordered to attend on him as soon as they heard about it.
What is the end of him who has been liberated? And what too is liberation and whence does it come from, (what again) is a man's own country, which is such that he may not have to return thence even after death.
When Nikumbha had been killed, the birds began to make a noise in all directions. The sound of their cries echoed through those woods and the Rākşasas were filled with terror at it as well as by the strength (of arms) possessed by that hero.
Satyaki, mounting on the chariot of Vasudeva that was incapable being conquered and which in battle resembled its owner himself, made Karna carless. With Daruka as his driver, he then proud of the strength of arms, got up again from his carlessness state.
Hearing the words of Panchala, Satyaki resembling a serpent began to his and in consequence thereof Bhima's arms were not at rest.
This is the eternal principle that a person who has been deceived, should not again trust such an individual. O king! do not trusting him (Jayadratha) place yourself under his protection like a parrot on a tree of Kalpasa
When a king, moved by desire for wealth and actuated only with the thought of profit, forces others against their wills to give up what is theirs, that indeed becomes his great misfortune.
In their support, Shakuni and the great car-warrior Uluka protected your troops with their resplendent swords; while the Gandharvas, excited by wrath, together with the impenetrable mountaineers (of Abhimanyu's side), like so many wind-gods or invisible spirits.
O you of mild countenance, if a person having been killed by me, goes up to heaven with his body and soul together; I do not get the fruits which one gets for performing hundred sacrifices.
I have observed the duty of a disciple, for you are my preceptors. These two foremost of ascetics should sit down in this place."
O king, the distance between this world and Yama's abode is six thousand five hundred yojanas.
The one, who is incapable of being killed by the gods and Yakshas and Asuras, that being has been named Death.
As I stood on the terrace of my car, O Kunti's son, pierced by your arrows and pained with grief for the death of my sons.
As long as the time has not come, so long does every thing live. Having said this Brahman's son Jamvavant with Mainda and Duvida along with Panchasamvata (Panccha).
The whole of the Yuga is a day in which there are greed and ignorance. Adharma increases therein, but virtue does not prosper.
Thereupon Dushasana, inflamed with rage and desirous of slaying the son of Pandu, hurled at him a lance that was furnished with all sorts of weapons. That lance which your son had sent forth in anger, Bhima cut asunder into two parts before it could reach his foe; and this seemed wonderful.
Having adopted this view, one should become contented and filled with virtue. He who is thus endued with virtue always enjoys happiness in full measure; he does not feel inclined for the gratification of his desires; and after having gratified all those desires which have been already born within him (he then turns away from them).
And men, O best of kings did not find out the real state of affairs. The Danavas thus began to practice penances in disguise amongst ascetics and saints.
If I am angry, how can I be patient with those two men who are but creatures? What need there is of saying more.
I am your servant, so you should duly honour me. O lord, he is always my faithful and devoted friend."
While thus living in the world, he (the king) is tossed about by all creatures and never obtains a cessation from life; therefore his mind does not attain tranquillity.
And a man should also see his own self, and the victory or defeat of others. The fear that arises from doing evil deeds is great;
As a child is guided by his mother and as one's birth determines the course of life, so why should I look after this Earth which abides here?
Shakuntala said : O king, install this your son as a prince of the kingdom. This child is born out of you and not from me; he resembles an immortal being. Therefore do what seems proper in due time.
O king, you have said that this sacrifice is a great one and full of difficulties. Brahmanas, Rakshasa (demons) who are desirous of acquiring wealth through sacrifices seek out its defects.
Dilipa said : Let the Brahmana who is robbing you of your Pushkara go where he likes, for his dwelling place be in the island that lies on water.
Vasishtha said : He who, though well read in the Vedas and other scriptures, still takes no interest in them (but is given up entirely to sensual enjoyment), he should be made a dog. And that person also who robs you of your Pushkara shall become an mendicant within this city itself."
Has Rāghava's love for me been extinguished, O Bharata? Or will he redeem us from this captivity.
Having deposited those (treasures), that best of the Bharata race, said to them,-I wish for water. You wait here in comfort.
The eyes of Rāma, Sugrīva and Laksmana resembling lotuses, pearls or gold in hue, when they were engaged with the discussion on Sitä's welfare, appeared like two suns.
I am capable of bearing the curse, but not my foot; therefore do you show me that which is for my good. You should save me.
Thereupon the powerful monkey, who is foremost of all monkeys and a delighter of gods Rāma began with his thumb-nail to scratch that mountain.
Thus addressed by him, the excellent Lakşmaņa of auspicious signs was again seized with grief and thus spoke to Rāma stricken with sorrow.
Your brothers, the lords of Mithilā, are endowed with countless virtues; and all the sages and royal assemblies have been gratified by you.
Karna, of great energy and who was greatly angry with the Pandavas (for his defeat), stretching himself high up in a rage, showed his prowess on battle-field.
Neither victory, nor sovereignty, nor eternal life with the celestials in company is dearer to me than this (this son of mine) who has slain an enemy equal to him in prowess.
If I live in a cemetery, do you make up your mind. The soul reaps the fruits of its acts; not my place of abode is sinful or otherwise.
Having thus wounded in battle the chief of Rakshasas, Ghatotkacha, that mighty car-warrior, Drona's son uttered a loud roar.
The people are sunk in those countries where they live under the influence of many sorts of attachment. They never succeed in gaining their objects and therefore become very sorry like persons who cross over a river by boats that have been broken down.
O foremost of men, having accomplished the task assigned by you in this assembly and conquered all people. You will then vanquish all those assembled Daityas and Danavas (in battle).
Then I covered him with a shower of arrows, as one cover the top of hill with his hands.
Daruka too, as directed by the scriptures of charioteering and after having got rid of all his horses discharged them in every direction.
When the chariot resembling a cloud of terrible strength and making an awful roar, began moving.
O lord of beasts, I do not like any other happiness than the fulfilment of my desire. Neither am I anxious for pleasure and luxury which depend upon wealth.
You know our strength, and the sanctity of Vedas. Do you what is proper; let your safety be in Brahman. O son of Parikshit, do not offend Brahinanas for this crime or at least seek virtue.
The wind alone can go there and Siddhas also, but how will these two princes be able to come here? O best of the Bharata race, let not your grief take you away.
The senses, again have been said by the Creator to be natural. They are not conscious of their own existence; therefore they should also be regarded as uncreated and non-egoistic.
Then with his mighty bow resembling the thunderbolt, and discharging arrows in battle, Adhiratha's son appeared like a burning circle of clouds on all sides.
O subduer of foes, your troops were covered with those dreadful arrows resembling snakes and shot by Bhima wielding his bow.
There the son of Dhritarashtra, Jayadratha and Vahlika were placed by Nakula. They all enjoyed themselves there as if they had been their own wives (in this world).
Do you, O king of kings, perform various sacrifices with profuse Dakshinas and gifts in them. Let your faith never be shaken."
By living in this way, one grows up and acquires many sons. The various points of the compass give rain when he is engaged in Brahmacharya; they also become fruitful for him.
He protected the rivers, seas and lakes in exactly the same way as Satyakrtu (Indra) protects them. Then bathing there and giving away various kinds of wealth he went on his journey towards Agnitirtha. There was a forest named Shamigarbha where fire had been extinguished.
Hearing their words, the door-keeper of that assembly began to beat a large drum furnished with golden bells.
The Sampati, thus pierced by Pragjya with three shafts, immediately killed him on the field of battle.
The foolish one is always happy like the gods in heaven. He, however, with his senses stupefied by a great fault of ignorance,
Hearing the sounds of those cars, and also that of their wheels which were exceedingly loud, Vaideha's sons started from their respective chariots.
Then, urged by Rāma's words and well-pleased with the information that he had been asked for (by Sītă), the prince of monkeys slowly took his place in the assembly.
Then that mighty-armed one, knowing the proper time for everything and skilled in strategy gradually entered into Dhristadyumna's apartment.
Karna and Arjuna shall be as Rama and Janardana, but what is the use of joining you two who are so united in purpose.
The person, who is afraid of giving away anything or that gives away with anger, enjoys the fruit thereof as if he were still in his mother's womb. That man also, who makes gifts from fear, reaps the fruits thereof when advanced in years.
Bhishma said Listen, O king! how the illustrious royal sage Vyasa of great fame and many accomplishments succeeded in obtaining a Brahmana wife who was so much sought after by all men.
You are, indeed, a Kshatriya by all the marks of your race; but you speak like an ignorant person and therefore do not appear well.
Do what Krishna has done. By that means, you will be blessed and famous; your life will become long; the Kuru race shall increase in prosperity and all our kinsmen shall survive like themselves."
The sound of the approaching host resembled that which is made by a vast and furious river when, having reached a mountain, it breaks into fragments.
O king, their vital spirits were cut off in battle with sharp arrows and they entered the world of Yama.
There in the middle of them, stood that illustrious one who was their king.
O you who have been abandoned by me, I shall now go back to my hermitage. It does not behove a father like yourself to abandon this child of yours (in the forest).
That son of Pritha, Vrikodara with his arms cut-off by me will fall on the ground with a dismembered body and deprived of weapons.
Menaka, the Apsara gave birth in due time at the hermitage of Bhrigu's son.
Vaishampayana said : O king, having killed the Rakshasas Bakaraka in that place they lived there for some time engaged in the study of Brahma.
That foremost of Rakshasas, having his mind overwhelmed with sleep and being endowed with great strength, set out for the royal highway which was adorned with every kind of beauty.
O mighty monarch, Chekitana and the valiant Kuntibhoja stood in that battle surrounded by a large force.
And the royal race, O foremost of Bharatas, desirous of enjoying this earth as meat, devour one another like vultures.
Without Rāma, what strength have the saints in this world? The creation of all creatures by them is their ancient and sacred act.
Thus addressed by Rama, the pious Suvarna (Kubera) took all those auspicious boons and then began to favour with them Ramalakshmana as well as Sita.
Dhritarashtra said Describe the battle that took place between Arjuna and Samsaptaka troops as also between him and those of other kings,
Thereupon, regaining consciousness Kiriti (Arjuna) took up a shaft resembling the mace of Yama himself. The high-souled Arjuna then saluted with folded palms and thus spoke to Partha “I shall pierce him on his head till he climbs upon his chariot.”
O lord, that you desire friendship with me is a great favour and gain.
You are appointed by me, and you of matchless effulgence will in the fields of your brother bring about good offspring.
Having performed many virtuous deeds and having acquired excellent birth, these men have gone up into heaven after acquiring those vehicles which are difficult of being obtained.
The duty of the Rishis has been described as fraught with great fruit and mystery, for he acquires all his objects by means of sacrifices.
Brihadashva said : O descendant of Kuru, when Kesini had thus addressed Nala, his heart was pained and tears filled up the eyes.
Freed from all sins, freed form every sort of attachment and desire, those persons who are worthy of being honoured by the great ones gifted with knowledge always show respect for them.
O worst of Rākşasas, my wife was stolen away from Janasthān through ignorance. Hence you are not strong!
Such men are pious, have no pride of birth and honour the twice-born ones. They are conversant with both Shrutis (Vedic lore) and Pravritti (conduct).
O charioteer, it is my nature that on beholding a fault and then finding no means of its removal I am again attracted towards the same.
By the exertions of those who were always devoted to truth and by their forces they would conquer this earth; but these sons of Pandu are living in exile for six or seven years.
Then the mighty bowman Satyajit of infallible prowess, displaying his excellent weapons, pierced Drona with a keen shaft.
Seeing the foremost of Raksasas blazing like a burning fire, that best of men stretched his bow.
And, O king, that mighty car-warrior, inflamed with rage and summoning the whole of his troops thus spoke. “My son will hurl Vivindhya.”
When the end of a Yuga approaches, kings become dissatisfied with their own kingdom and desirous of acquiring other kingdoms.
Having defeated his enemies in battle, Nakula, that scorcher of foes said angrily to the driver Take me towards Drona's army.
And the daughter of Videha, when not seen by me, does increase my sorrow; and seeing the season (of spring), with its heat and perspiration, is also an occasion for grief.
Therefore one should perform some good action by which he may escape the stroke of destiny, and achieve his heart's desire.
O descendant of Bharata, then I was pleased and said "O ascetic, wait a little. You will soon see the lord of the celestials."
Having selected his own proper duties, that conqueror of foes guarded them. Like righteousness itself which manifests in its opposite form when assailed by wrong-doers;
The sons of Dhritarashtra, and Bhishma Drona Kripa and others, all followed him (Arjuna) in their proper ranks.
And, like the ocean in its sport, Hari entered into a conflict with Bhima. Then he rose up from heaven and appeared before him as if rising out of the deeps.
There were large trees of various kinds, which always covered the hall with flowers. And in that cool and beautiful hall there was a delightful seat made of soft grasses.
Seeing the Rishi in fear, he entered that great ocean. When Arvuna had disappeared from sight and when all creatures were struck with terror, they began to worship Atharva (the god of fire).
O foremost of the Kurus, it is now eight o'clock and I have not yet had my meal. Had I taken any food I would certainly be unable to move about as freely as before.
As the king was speaking thus, Danda possessed by lust and placing his hand on his head said.
The holy one then said, 'Do you reveal yourself in your true form.' Then the Sarasvati entered into my body and revealed herself.
As if she had been bitten by a snake in her sleep, the middle size lady grew pale and became very beautiful.
And though my life is thus painful and miserable, yet I am satisfied with it; for the mendicant lives at his sweet will.
When the eldest son of Pandu got back his kingdom, people were seen talking in groups and assemblies about it.
Sanjaya said O descendant of Kuru, the son of Pritha did not take any steps for their safety as he knew that there was no possibility of victory without Satyaki and Krishna.
O best of monkeys, you deserve my addressing you. But if the indomitable Rāma having a self-conscious mind has despatched that monkey (Angada) knowing your prowess, then he shall not ask me as I am in his presence without first understanding it and putting forth all his strength.
Thus addressed, Bhima did what the king had ordered him. Hearing that foremost of men Gudakesha was coming there with joyous heart.
Thereafter was created the powerful Brahma, gifted with knowledge and possessing a body. He is in his form of righteousness that excellent lord of all creatures called Prajapati.
Then the Karkotaka snake, trembling and with joined hands said, O king know me for a serpent of that name. I have captured Brahmarshi Narada endued with high ascetic merit! He is enraged at my capture and therefore has cursed me. Therefore do you stand still as an inanimate object till Nala comes here; he will be your deliverer from this curse."
If, deprived of Arjuna and not renouncing the field of battle, he see me approaching him in order to compass his destruction, consider then that the son of Pandu is already captured.
O destroyer of foes, the great bowmen Drona and his son Ashvathama together with Kripacharya as well as other kings that had joined him are ready to kill Arjuna or us. This Kapiketana (Karna) has sworn not to return home until he kills Savyasachi; we have also taken an oath for this purpose.
Do you wish well, O foremost of men, for those whose welfare do you seek. Let the lotus-eyed goddess (Lakshmi) be propitious towards you and let your chariot also prove serviceable in battle."
That Earth which belonged to the son of Ambarisha and Mndhāt, has been given by you. You have performed this sacrifice as a gift with all its Dakşinas;
That king, who by selecting his ministers for proper duties in peace and war, does what is right, increases the prosperity of his kingdom as also that of all other countries.
By you, O lady of excellent limbs this relation has been contracted which is not seen in the world. For your purification I have thought it all over; for even people say that by contracting a relationship with me they acquire female nature and having thus become females they give birth to sons on my body.
And O best of the Bharata race, I shall lead a life in the forest, observing all your vows. It is proper for us and our family that you should confer upon us wealth at the end of this age; and then we will go into exile in the woods! Whether subsisting on air or living without food, I shall practice great asceticism along with Pali (Sita).
His head was in the sky, his feet were on earth and his arms formed the four cardinal points. That of immeasurable soul is incomprehensible even by Siddhas (celestial beings).
In the case of Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira) I am engaged in every way, O son of Prisata; but it does not behove me thus to act towards you.
Some persons say that everything is the result of thought. I shall, forsooth, discuss this subject in five particulars and with reference also to its five sub-divisions.
O Marica, if you do not do this I will kill you today. This is my duty and even by force shall you perform it; one who opposes the king does never enjoy happiness.
Having thus comforted himself, and taken up another great bow, the powerful son of Hridika stood there checking all those Pandavas in battle.
Freed from all sins like the moon liberated from clouds, a person of steady mind succeeds in attaining his objects by exercising patience for sometime.
Charity, skill in all branches of learning, knowledge, courage, modesty, fame, excellent intelligence, nobility, prosperity, good fortune and contentment are ever present with Nara.
Krishna said : Do you observe virtue. There is nothing superior to Virtue. Those kings who live by the observance of duty, conquer this earth.
O king, Rama of high ascetic merit having thus bewailed piteously for a long time performed all the funeral ceremonies. He then burnt his father in fire and vowed that he would kill every one of them (the enemies).
The person who dances and sings, and gives away drinks that make one drunk should be considered as the father of all creatures. One cannot hurt him by doing anything wrong; he knows what is good for himself.
Then those (Rākşasas) adorned with burnished gold, rushing against one another began to assail Hanumān who was stationed at the gate.
Those that are deaf and dumb, those who have their eyes closed or are blind should also be invited as guests at Shraddhas. They should all be treated by the Vedaparaga (i.e., one conversant with the Vedas).
Virtue is said to be derived from wealth and the knowledge of it has been declared by men. And, O king, a man should not go beyond this limit in matters which he cannot accomplish.
The Vedas declare that renunciation is the highest state. Renunciation of all worldly objects leads on to contentment, which in its turn leads on to emancipation and ultimately union with Brahma (the universal soul). All creatures whether mobile or immobile are under this law of birth death and rebirth. Happiness, misery pleasure pain, prosperity adversity, etc., form part of it. It has an origin but no end.
The moon is acquired by the performance of sacrifices, and in cows. And thereupon the celestials are delighted; then all creatures become happy.
Having been thus embraced with good wishes, the noble Satyaki became as one deserving of honey. Drinking a cupful of Kailasa-honey having red eyes and being intoxicated he was highly delighted when he took in his hand some Viraja gold.
That son of Pritha, that foremost among all car-warriors having the best steeds for his chariot and having driven away this army (of your), is approaching our camp.
What is there that cannot be achieved by a man who has lost his self-control, and whose senses are overpowered with pleasure? It is only from sleepiness and indolence, or through folly of understanding that such ignorance arises.
And in that great battle, afflicted by the rod of Brahman (the thunderbolt), those Asuras, assuming forms at will and endued with prowess according to their pleasure and burning like fire or poison, were all burnt up.
The chaste lady, having met me who was stricken with the arrow of Cupid and afflicted with grief in that forest and who had lost his happiness when he regained it again said these words.
O Saumitri, see the Kuntajas on mountain tops covered with buds and desirous of rain, their eyes being filled with tears! And (see), these plants are standing in my way as if inviting me.
Seeing the jewel, Rama will remember me and also my mother and king Dasaratha.
Hearing those words of Bharata, like nectar to the ear, Rāma endowed with prowess and truth in speech, attained exceeding delight. And he spoke these auspicious words, enhancing Kaikeyi's joy-“I am pleased; I am gratified by your present speech, O sinless one.”
Thus accosted by Karna at the request of those Daityas and with obeisance, Suyodhana (Duryodhana) got up.
Shaunaka said : O king, I desire your happiness and the well being of all creatures. Remembering virtue do you dispel pride and arrogance from yourself.
O son, you are like my son Pandu; and the highly intelligent Vidura is your equal in affection.
Neither Sudharman of the Dasharha race, nor that person in Brahmana's form whom I had seen before was present at this assembly.
With his sharp arrows, shot from the Gandiva and resembling flashes of lightning, he cut-off in battle, all the limbs beginning with head and neck down to legs.
One day a Brahmana came and sat before that foremost of Rishis, his preceptor. He was endued with great energy. His soul had been purified by truthfulness.
O king, on the fall of Sudakshina and that heroic warrior Shrutayudha your troops inflamed with rage rushed towards Partha in a body.
When the king, Krishna-Varma, arrived at that region of space he was freed from all his fetters. But seeing him thus free and desirous of getting out again into a lower world, Karkotaka said
O ranger of the night, I am your superior and therefore shall meet with destruction. Do what is proper for you; but in no way do I follow you."
Then leaving this world, he entered the abode of Varuna. And having thrown his trident into salt water (he said), "I grant you a boon."
Krishna, Draupadi looked on the lotus-eyed one with a jealous eye. She accepted his love and she also gave him her own heart in return; for he was like Hrishikesha himself or Dhananjaya (Arjuna) itself in person.
O you that consume the enemy's strength, all these snakes are sent by Vasuki; and many others born of good families have been sacrificed in great sacrificial fires. They were dreadful-looking and powerful; I shall now describe them as born in Takshaka's race. Listen to me.
That which is without attributes and that which has all sorts of qualities, should be considered by the wise as one in its essence. The wise men therefore worship those Tirthas where sacrifices are celebrated for attaining Liberation (from this world).
Surely the gods are deluding us for our good. For we are being killed by Karna and Bhima with their arrows which were derived from Indra's bow (Vishnu).
The king of Madra, seeing his son deprived of consciousness by the blow inflicted upon him and also that he was a great ornament in battle, carried away Karna on his car.
Vaishampayana said : Having been thus commanded, the high-souled Drupada accompanied by his priest of great learning and accomplishments went into that city called Nagasahvya.
O god, having given this excellent alms (to the Brahmana), I shall attain to a high end in that world where one is clothed with a garment of white silk.
The Nagas, the Asuras and the earth herself were all scorched by that terrible energy. And breathing hard they rose up from their places desirous of escaping (from it).
Vaishampayana said : Krishna, having failed in his efforts and being rejected by the Kurus, went away (from their presence). Going up to Pritha she thus slowly spoke as if sorrowfully.
Having been thus urged by the saints and ascetics, that lady of fair cheeks was exceedingly rejoiced as if a seed deprived of water and wind for long had recovered its life when it received showers.
Why did you not consent to my request for your own self-surrender? A person who surrenders his self, goes down to that dreadful region which is called speech and which has an evil name.
O king, a large quantity of rice was then burnt in the house of Dhritarashtra. In that fire also were consumed all the vehicles (that belonged) to Pandu's son.
O Vasava, many thousands of Indras have lived on this earth as powerful and energetic as yourself.
O foremost of men, with six arrows and the two sons of Somaka pierced that best of car-warriors in his vitals.
And there were heard the sounds of men breathing and also those emitted by others. But all that noise was suddenly hushed up,
And eating but little, and living for many days in this manner, their bodies will be emaciated by means of penances with controlled senses.
Those kings, having been duly entertained, went their respective quarters. And those mansions were like the summit of Kailasa and adorned with various articles (of luxury).
The kings wore on their heads many sorts of jewels, and they were dressed in golden garments; and the umbrellas overhanging them were ornamented with beautiful paintings.
O chastiser of foes, this night has passed away like a moment. I am thinking over all the incidents that have happened today as also those that took place before in days gone by.
And four white pavilions, and horses, elephants and steeds; with gateways leading up to halls of state and palaces, adorned with arches, and the royal residence resembling a mass of fleecy clouds; furnished with an excellent entranceway, having its walls decked out in white like garlands, emitting perfumes as if from celestial flowers, measuring twenty cubits on each side, containing beds and seats for the use of guests, supplied with all kinds of delicacies, pure drinking vessels and spotless napery.
We have heard that one who is lean and weak, living on a diet of roots only and engaged in the practice of Yoga and having his body reduced by ascetic penances fell down from heaven.
And you were deprived of your kingdom and went through a great calamity; but still, with the help of kindness do wish for living as a Kshatriya.
That lord of men gave away wealth in great delight, as was asked by those that begged for it. He gave them five times what they had requested from him.
The King said : O fowler, I give you the prosperous kingdom of Shivi. Whatever other thing that is dear to your heart and whatever desire you have in mind; everything will be given to you by me."
Vaishampayana said : I shall now relate the incidents that took place in the absence of Krishna (Draupadi) and which were all caused by Destiny.
Then the powerful Vishalya, suddenly changed his own self into a dart; and with that he grasped another sharp arrow.
Is he getting friends and is his enemy approaching him? And has the good star been propitiated with whom (the good star) has been placed before his enemies.
Hearing that a son of great energy had been born, the seven Rishis abandoned their respective wives and adopted Arundhati as wife.
The seven kinds of living beings, having different powers and various characteristics did not succeed in creating the universe alone.
Then, having taken Lakşmaņa's bow and stringing it without any twang, the graceful Rāma-the conqueror of foes-took up an arrow resembling a dreadful serpent. And that one burning like fire at the end of a Yuga, he fixed on his bow-string saying these words.
I have come here in obedience of the high-souled Sugrīva, king of monkeys. And that monkey is named Hanumān who has been sent by him as a messenger among you foremost ones.
You will today behold that hero with the driver Shveta and Krishna, engaged in slaying his enemies. It is him whom you are asking about Karna.
The man who is not known by others, cannot be happy and he also should never disregard any one.
O highly intelligent one, you are always engaged in doing good. Tell me how the lord of waters was installed by the gods formerly."
Those who are given to censure on account of their habits and birth, a wise man should not live with them; for it is highly desirable that he should avoid persons whose hearts have been corrupted by sin.
Those two heroes, desirous of defeating each other and greatly pleased with the fight that took place between them became exceedingly angry like mountains struck by thunderbolts.
The car, with its standard and horses adorned with gold and armed with bows of good quality became the terror of all as it came out (from behind those trees).
Yudhishthira said : When the Kshatriya race has been destroyed and all castes are confounded, when other powerful men (than kings) take possession of wealth that is theirs by right; if a Brahmana or Vaishaya or Shudra becomes stronger than any one else in might, then he should protect his subjects with proper punishment. He may either do what ought not be done or abstain from doing what must be done, so long as he does not make them suffer oppression at the hands of robbers; therefore weapons must be kept ready for use against those who belong not to our own family.
O king, listen now to my other words if you like. A man should always be vigilant and capable of devising means for success when he is desirous of victory in battle.
The king did not know that the ascetic had observed a vow of silence. Therefore, his father possessed by anger attempted to force him (to speak).
It is also in consequence of the course which has been laid down for men that they acquire knowledge when their minds are filled with particular sentiments.
After the death of Suta's son, O king, his warriors became panic-stricken and wounded by arrows. And being deprived of their protector they sought for another like a herd of deer seeking after its leader.
Then the hero's son, O king, having taken up a mace of gold and iron resembling in strength thunder-bolt with loud roars began to strike down his enemies' umbrella.
And those heroes, with their bodies smeared over and wearing robes of Kusa grass, tied round the waist by a Munja string; each offering an hundred thousand Dakshinas.
Then stretching his bow made of gold and adorned with beautiful gems, he (Arjuna) cut-off the standard. That bannerless son of Virata was then seen in battle fighting on horse-back.
O lord of earth, your son then, seeing Bhima deprived of his senses and on the point of death was carried away by Aji in a car before the very eyes of that hero.
By good luck, O child, your mind is at present intent on performing pious acts. And by the same good fortune you have always a merciful disposition,
As Narayana is in the eyes of all creatures, as water is in a lake, so also Rudra (Shiva) has his abode among all deities.
Then Kritavarman and Duryodhana's son, Kripa killed those men who had come out of the camp in order to get wealth.
O Shakra, I shall perform the horse-sacrifice with a very auspicious steed. And after having performed it, I will call you for receiving me as an offering;
You are virtuous, but why do you not perceive this great sin of yours? Why do you not praise your own self and others in the same manner (that I have done)?
Thereupon that mighty car-warrior, waxing worth with anger and hurrying his chariot forward, struck the latter on the breast with seventy sharp arrows.
Men acquire excellent offspring who are fruitful of virtue. Manu, the son of Bhrigu (said), “Men beget children on their wives by means of semen obtained from other persons."
As the bow of that king, who was armed with a sword in his hand and also an arrow on his bow-string fell down (to be cut off by Bhima), so did all those people feel terrified.
O slayer of Madhu, at the end of each Yuga, contracting all creatures within himself and then re-creating them from his own self, he makes this universe again.
Seeing Shikhandin seated on the car, Partha's sons surrounded him with their cars in battle.
Vaishampayana said : Then Krishna thus spoke in that assembly of heroes.
That wise man who is not confounded when the enemies of his party are as numerous and powerful as the sun.
He, who is a follower of his preceptor in all religious observances and who himself examines the means by which he may earn wealth for acquiring happiness with great ease, acquires long life.
I shall perform the same feat against you, O Bhima. Thereupon holding a mace like Death himself with his rod in hand,
When I see Yudhishthira who is a companion of the enemy, who always speaks agreeably (to his will), my anger increases certainly.
The Moon, after having crossed the Sun and taken one day's journey in that course of his path which is called the "day", tries to devour him.
When that event had passed away, king Duryodhana too became forgetful of it all in his sleep. And this thought also entered into the mind of Karna, “I will defeat Pandu's son in battle."
Therefore, even in the case of virtuous and aged persons, you should serve Krishna. You ought not however speak thus; your intentions are certainly wrong.
The ruler of earth, delighted with Bharata and treated in a friendly manner by him, did not think of going away. He had fixed his mind upon the words that were spoken by the father (of Rāma).
I do not consider myself competent in the art of fighting with a mace. O king, for this reason thirteen years have passed away while looking after that iron man Bhima who was desirous of killing me (in battle).
Virtue becomes vice, and both virtue and sin are the result of a particular state. The place or time which produces it is also peculiar to that act.
Karna and the son of Dhritarashtra are creating terror for me. My preceptor is desirous of obtaining what he wants, his disciples fight according to their own discretion (not as instructed by him).
O foremost of men, I shall behold that descendant of Raghu like a great Rishi rejoiced at seeing his preceptor.
This Vrikodara is a hero, he is brave and wrathful. He has no regard for his body or life; in fact, he possesses great strength of mind as well.
Thus addressed by the high-souled Kākutstha, Sugrīva along with four monkeys was exceedingly delighted.
Vidura, who knew the intentions of all and was a true seer, understood at once by its appearance that it referred to wicked-minded people.
The sky was filled with vultures and Kankas, O king. That terrible battle between Bhima and Karna took place in that forest.
Bhishma said When that best of Brahmanas, O Bharata, had gone to his sleep, Gautama rose up and proceeded towards the sea.
Having seen the two, Dhristadyumna and Vrikodara, in that battle, Yudhishthira was pleased. He then came back with pleasure to his own camp.
And shall I see Rāvana with his associates, slain in battle by the dreadful weapon of Rama within a short time?
Vyasa said : Having been trained up in these two hermitages, go further. Listen with rapt attention what work you should now perform.
O king, ever desirous of victory in battle and always following Dushasana's directions was Karna.
Vishvavasu said : O best of the Brahmanas, what you have told me about these five (objects) is not so; it should be explained by you how they are.
He thinks that Bhurisravas, deprived of his arms in the battle has killed me; and he is either dead or wounded.
Being urged on by the pain caused by those shafts and taking refuge in that loud-voiced mountain of immeasurable height, I heard your terrible words.
Your maids, and your wife, and all the ladies of your household were highly pleased with you for having thus saved their honour.
Formerly, O Rāma, when the Kurus were constantly engaged in ploughing their fields, Indra came down from heaven and asked them why they should thus engage themselves with so much exertion. The king of the celestials also enquired for what object those royal sages had taken up the work of cultivation, as well as the reason by which this earth was being turned over.
Seeing his human-like feats in battle which none else could do, the followers of Karna well versed in Yoga began to eulogise him.
Then I, with reverence and in due form told the Sarasvati that she was my preceptor's best disciple.
Bhishma said When the Daitya was thus afflicted by fever, great joy and loud shouts of delight were heard from all the celestials and Rishis.
Then the son of Vikartana, Karna and Shakuni, the son of Subala all these began to attack the Pandavas with various devices.
When he shall be killed by me, then many cars of the same shape and distinguished from one another will quickly rush against that best among men namely Arjuna.
And is king Dhritarashtra along with his sons, desirous of living at the head of ministers and courtiers? Are friends united together or are they broken up by jealousy for having obtained wealth and riches.
The king Dhritarashtra too, having his brothers the heroic Bhishma and Drona with Kripacharya by him supported on one side of that army by Suta's son (Karna) who was a great ornament in battle.
Thereupon when the day dawned, that lord of men performed his religious rites. And having offered adoration to Viśvāmitra, and also having worshipped those high-souled ones Raghava, he addressed them in words sanctioned by scripture.
You have been born in a high family, you are very beautiful and your speech is sweet. By the desire of love or by lustfulness do you wish to marry me?
I shall now describe in full the entire history of Ruru, O Brahmana. Listen with rapt attention.
O ascetic, I have purified my soul by hearing it. My hairs are standing erect and my mind is pleased.”
Lomasha said : O Yudhishthira, I have asked you about the subject of which you wished me. Hear from me all that is now being told by me as regards what happened in days gone by at a time when there was universal darkness and terror.
You, a foe of mine, are moving about like an invisible one and following me for my sake. But you do not approach Rāma, who is in the very midst (of that forest).
The maid-servant did as she was commanded. She waited at your door, burning in the day and night with half her body naked.
Knowing that men are coming here, O king of kings, he (Indra) came himself and bowing down said:-“Do you tell this to Yudhishthira.
Thereupon, O king, the mighty-armed Bhima with his eyes reddened in wrath, threw at Suta's son a mace of six feet long and as hard as adamant. That mace was furnished with four wings made of iron; it had been adorned by gold chains. It was like an arrow shot from the bow-string or a thunder-bolt hurled down by Indra himself on the Asuras. With that mace he killed all the horses and charioteers belonging to Arjuna's army. Like Indra armed with the Thunderbolt fighting against the Danavas (the race of demons).
While I was tilling the field with a plough, there sprung up from under my feet that one who is known by name as Sītā.
Then stretching his mighty bow decked with gold and having the string made of metal, he fixed on it a sharp arrow which was capable of breaking mountains.
O king, restrain that destroyer of virtue and happiness; she is the slayer of fame, prowess and heroism as well as an increaser of joy in enemies.”
Those that are fools in this world and those who have transcended the human understanding enjoy happiness; while others suffer miseries.
O mighty-armed one, where the lord of wealth obtained it with ease; and being installed in that very place he was met by the Marutas.
And that highly effulgent one pleased his ancestors, and the celestials with offerings; and he gratified all the Rishis according to due rites.
Having entered the city and gone up to Yudhishthira, that hero related all that had happened among Vrishnis and Andhakas.
The powerful Arjuna, with the arrows of his Gandiva discharged rapidly cut-off their heads and arms adorned with ornaments.
The Brahmana said : O blessed lady, I have come here by following this course. Waiting for your arrival I shall stay in this great forest.
And having reflected upon the cardinal and subsidiary points, mountains, forests, earth, sky in a moment's time he arrived at Brihaspati.
I have been sent here by Sugriva, who is righteous and wishes friendship with me. He has made me his treasurer; therefore in order that he may not repent of this, let him be brought back soon from the mountain Rsyamuka.
And the middle wife may eat on being commanded by her husband. Why then do the Pitris desire such food?
Thereupon, the dreadful Raksasa, resembling clouds with their roaring sound, thus addressed Sumitrā's son in a careless way.
O Maricha, such has been my fixed resolve in mind that it is incapable of being thwarted even by the combined efforts of Indra and other celestials.
Today the moon has risen in Pusya. And tomorrow it will enter Vasu, and on that day all divinatory persons shall speak of the influence which this conjunction is likely to exert over us."
The man who is gifted with intelligence and memory, who has skill in his profession, who by nature is kind-hearted and considerate towards others, who never feels mortified whether he be honoured or dishonoured; the priest whom you have appointed as your minister for domestic purposes, should always be treated with respect.
Then Jamadagni's eldest son, named Rumanvan by his birth-name and Sushena in battle arrived there.
O hero, 0 chastiser of foes if you think fit I shall take a rest for some time in the interior and tomorrow set out on my journey.
Having performed the Svastiyanjana (auspicious) rites in company with those Brahmanas, and having had the prospect of victory as well as that which will follow on it, he saw his own intelligence filled with joy.
Then that mighty-armed one, O lord of the universe, informed me (of what I was doing), saying-"O son of Kunti, do my business so as to obtain success in this horse-sacrifice.”
O foremost of Brahmanas, know that covetousness is the root of all evil. Men who are not learned in morality and virtue become wicked through avarice.
Whether they are ignorant of the Vedas, or whether their knowledge be accurate and correct; let not Brahmanas disregard any one. They should treat all equally as if they were fire covered with ashes.
O you of excellent vows, I shall show this highly resplendent bow to Rama and Lakşmaņa.
The cool breezes, having the fragrance of Ketaki flowers and resembling dark clouds in appearance, come out from my navel.
Are Somadatta, and the intelligent Bhurishrava, Satyasandha, Shala, Drona with his sons Kripacharya of excellent prowess?
Thus, O you of great wisdom, these gods have come down in the form of men and having done what they had intended to do they returned again to heaven.
The person whose mind is not affected by misfortune, and who never speaks ill of others becomes freed from all sins. What need have such a man then for fear?
A Shudra, who is versed in the Vedas and who has been duly initiated therein becomes a Brahmana. He lives for many years as an officer of learning, but he soon perishes."
Knowledge, action and agent are regarded as distinct from each other in the enumeration of qualities. Listen now how they differ one form another.
Smell, touch, taste and form are considered as the attributes of that which is called "subtle". I shall now describe at length about the attribute of smell.
One should never speak harshly, nor give pain by words. He who does not hurt others with his tongue attains the highest good of body and mind. But he who speaks in anger commits a sin which sends him down into hell.
O twice-born Rishi, my wife has asked me for a suitable husband who is adorned with earrings set with gems. I give you permission (to marry her).
Then Vasudeva spoke thus to that foremost of men, Arjuna. "O you greatly powerful man, with the help of your celestial weapons break this mountain and bring it down."
Then having gone to the abode of his brother, Kumbhakarna accompanied by Raksasa began to shake (the earth) with his tread.
Hearing of the auspicious story about Dhananjaya, your brothers and other Kurus were greatly delighted.
There, elephants were slain in hundreds and horses began to be terrified. The weapons of the Pandavas who desired victory blazed forth (in their hands).
Bowing down his head before that senior preceptor of theirs, he went by the path through which Phalguna had passed. The son of Kunti was also followed and supported on either side by Dharma's eldest son Yudhishthira himself.
The destroyer of all foes, the illustrious Prachetas (Shiva) with his three eyes burning like fire. Having a body made up of gold and infinite in energy, having taken that celestial bow called Ishu which is irresistible in battle;
Then abandoning Satyaki, Karna rushed towards Arjuna. Wounding him with three shafts he wounded Krishna and Partha repeatedly each with twenty arrows.
These trees, scattered by the wind and emitting sweet perfumes, are weeping in grief with their six limbs.
That tiger of a king, endued with great prowess and known for his virtue, beholding the intelligent (Rishi) Kacha free from all defects in person or speech and concluding that he was worthy of being adored as one's own self honoured him by offering him the post of minister.
The virtuous person, who is devoted to both virtue and pleasure, duly follows all the duties as laid down in the Shastras. But without a proper knowledge of their relative values one should never act by these virtues for acquiring worldly profit.
O son, let these seven wind-gods range the sky. They are called Marutas and they are my sons of celestial form.
O king, he obeyed all the orders given by Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira).
It is from Him that all beings originate. By him the universe has been created and it exists by his power; He, therefore, should be adored in thought, word, and deed for acquiring success.
Mercy towards the good is one of the great attributes of virtue. And mercy always brings happiness to those who are virtuous.
Thus, O best of kings, the royal sage Shvetaketu lived for a long time. He was highly respected by all and he performed many sacrifices with his priests and friends as assistants. The fire (of that sacrifice) burnt in it continuously during one thousand years.
It is by this observance of Brahmacharya that the celestials became what they are and those great Rishis, gifted with intelligence, have acquired regions in heaven.
Today I have got the Kaikeyas, and Kashis, Kosalis, Chedis, and other Vangas who all depend upon me.
Then he pierced his bow and charioteer with two arrows, the latter in return struck him on his head. He then killed all those horses of Arjuna with four other shafts and sent them away towards Yama's abode.
By entering through a hole, by assuming an assumed character and speaking the language of Brahmanas, Krishna saw that Jarāsandha was in his own house.
Wherever, O foremost of the Kurus, torches are lighted there those heroes perish like aquatic animals when they come in contact with fire.
Why do these kings, O monarch, fly away? It is evident that the highly intelligent Savyasachin (Arjuna) has quickly covered this army with his arrows.
Thereafter he (Shiva) caused the best of offerings, namely, a feast for all his servants and then for Yama, Kubera and Mahendra.
Dhritarashtra said The sons of Pandu are always hostile towards me, O foremost of twice-born ones. I have made up my mind for peace or war with them. Do you tell me truly what course is proper for a king like myself; and (therefore) will I act according to your words.
I am living with you for seeing him. For five years, O hero, have I been waiting here for beholding the invincible and truthful Dhananjaya (Arjuna). But I do not see Vibhatsu (Krishna) along with you all; therefore, O Vrikodara, my heart is burning in grief."
Thus having made a compact with Vindhya, O destroyer of foes the son of Varuna has not yet returned from that quarter.
Having fixed his sight on the king, Karna in that battle pierced through with keen shafts, cut off within a moment of time, the coat-of-mail (of Arjuna), consisting of ninety nine joints.
Fearing the night-rangers, and dreading snakes and women. The gods took that Brahmana for a snake or an animal of some other kind.
Having completed his study he returned home. Thereupon, desirous of performing a sacrifice for acquiring wealth and also renown in the world, he began to present thousands upon thousands of kine as presents (to Brahmanas).
All the acts, O monarch of this battle are accomplished by these two. Then Dhrishtadyumna said unto Vrikodara (Bhima).
Achala, Vrishaka, Karna the best of car-warriors and Shalya endued with great strength as also Balhika possessed of great might.
As he was thus speaking, Bharata addressed Gaya in sweet accents as if addressing the sky itself.
O Madhava, if in battle we look after our own duties only and not for any other object; then at the proper time (i.e. death) we shall obtain heaven by means of arms.
If a Brahmana does not possess learning and conduct, if he is destitute of Vedic knowledge or virtuous behaviour, then the wealth given by one who wishes for gain becomes useless.
Beholding the mace given by Bhimasena, that was made of iron and adorned with gold Suyodhana cut it into pieces.
That portion of the Vedas which is spoken by Bhagiratha, and was born in Shuka's loins, and that has three parts. Therefore it is called Indriyavada (doctrine).
O king, beholding those mighty car-warriors thus afflicted by the enemy's troops. Draupadi became very sorry and she could not breathe freely (for a moment).
Duryodhana said : O preceptor, when the Preceptors himself is present what need there be of peace? When he who has been offended is before us why should we take any other course than that which will satisfy him.
Janamejaya said Let not words, or mind, or actions bring me back from the vow of silence. I shall have to bear with you Brahmanas even if your feet touch mine.
He laughed and cut-off the bow of that destroyer of foes. And he cut down with his shafts, the elephant made up of gold as well as the standard (of Asura).
Even men knowing virtue get confused in the matter of their own interests. Therefore, O king, I tell you this if it pleases you.
O king, when Karna began to distinguish Ghatotkacha from us, then the best of those who could wield weapons sent a celestial weapon at him.
The Rishis said : O Rama, it is well-known that the Uttravarsha (the northern country) is called Sanatan. It extends five yojanas all round; and there formerly in a sacrifice by which great rewards were obtained, Indra had made a hole through this earth for extracting water from its very depths
Those fearful arrows, having passed through the armour of that high-souled son of Pandu and piercing him through his breast piece they were covered with blood.
While the sound of the shower was still continuing, Bhimasena said these words taking up his charming and fragrant arm which had been smeared with sandal.
I have been deceived by a wicked person assuming the form of a man, who is unable to do anything good for me. But now my eyes are open and I shall not be again cheated."
The gods and the pious always converse with one another. They never come in contact with human beings, they who know all sorts of topics which are agreeable or disagreeable (to men).
Vaishampayana said : O king, having entered the asylum of that truthful ascetic (Vyasa), Arjuna saw him sitting at one corner.
Thereupon, that lord Mahadeva delightedly sat upon the mountains. Then casting his long arms he said these words unto Rāvana of ten necks.
Thereupon, he sent for those of his friends who were all endowed with immeasurable energy. He did it at the request of his daughter-in-law (Draupadi) and on her saying that she was in a great distress.
I have been reduced by the disaster that has befallen me, into a state of stupefaction. Having heard of Bhishma and Drona killed in battle, I do not wish any longer to live!
What Kshatriya, O king, who is possessed of self-knowledge and a good birth, having fought with his foes in battle, does not enter heaven which has no equal?
Then that illustrious and mighty Lakşmaņa, seeing those arrows of his useless, showered a thousand shafts on the enemy.
The descendants of men who have come here after death, are able to save their forefathers and the Pitris.
Behold, O Laksmana the uproar that is made in this forest by birds and animals on account of my power.
As the great and afflicted prince, who was engaged in preparing a bed for his wife, waited there that night passed away.
Those best of monkeys resembling hills, leaped up and placed themselves on the tree.
Then he (Drona) struck Yuyudhana with a sharp, welltempered and excellent arrow. Thus deprived of his car, steeds and charioteer in the battle by Kshatriya hero Yuyudhana was felled on the ground like an uprooted tree;
O king, that dreadful battle which was fought between Karna and the Pandavas in the midst of their troops had been very terrible.
And those who were anxious to see the Assembly Hall and Yudhishthira, did not go there. They considered it a thousand times better than what was given them (in the palace).
Then that descendant of Kuru, drawing his bow, shot it at him. And the sound made by its string and by its joints was like that produced from some mechanical contrivance;
O king, Krishna the daughter of Mandhata is a great river that never causes any disease. She has many tributaries and is capable of carrying large vessels on her stream; she flows through Brahman's country as well as through Vrishabhakas (Babylon). The Brahmamandhya which joins it from behind is also very broad. And there are other rivers in this world which join Ganga at different places like Manjula and Chitravaha and Citrapala and Mandaka and Vaikarna and Sushunya and all these are sources of joy to the people who live by them.
Thereupon abandoning their relatives and friends, the people fled in all directions.
Those two heroic and royal brothers, Rāma and Laksmana coming hither shall slay all the enemies by means of their shafts.
A man may be born in a thousand different worlds, all of which are subject to death. In the state called Tiryagyoni and that also known as Devaloka (the abode of celestials).
Karna is envious, careless and his preceptor is old. The son of Pritha (Arjuna) is angry; powerful but restrained in anger by the restraint of Dharma (virtue); furious and firm in prowess. Therefore this battle will be fierce on all sides and no one can conquer it. All these heroes are accomplished in weapons and have gained great fame.
He, who is pure in body and mind and free from all desires which are the source of misery like a tortoise that withdraws its limbs into itself, lives always happily.
The roads of that army were decked with banners and covered over with the feathers, flowers and leaves of various trees. They looked like so many celestial paths in which every thing was pure as silver or gold; they contained a variety of fragrant perfumes and plants, and presented an appearance charming enough for any one's heart to behold.
The following is a description of other subjects, all connected with the subject of religion. I shall now describe those that are not so directly connected with it and which form part of Yoga.
Having heard these words, the celestials said to Indra of thousand eyes,-If you do not perform this sacrifice with us we shall never get any share in it.
Some, desirous of victory, march at the van and rear-guard. Others, casting off their armour and weapons, take shelter in water or lie down on the ground.
So also in the battle between elephants, horses and men. The blood of many elephants and steeds and human beings was flowing along like a stream of red-coloured water over all those countless carcasses of elephant, horse and man that were lying down on the field.
Vasudeva said When the Vrishni hero, Pradyumna was thus assailed by Shalva's arrows in battle and when he himself became stupefied, all his troops were filled with dismay. The army of the Andhakas became greatly agitated at this event; their hearts were filled with fear for they thought that it would be impossible to recover themselves from such a calamity.
The highly powerful tiger, after his bath first came across the Jambuka, who was greatly perplexed at heart.
The wise man, having heard the good and bad things that others say about him, takes them as he would take milk from water.
By them are laid down the paths of virtue. Those who follow these, never lose their way in life and become always qualified for attaining heaven.
You should not, having known him for a boy, disregard (him). He may be either young or old. But know that death is sure in battle.”
The remaining part, O Sanjaya! the thunderbolt of this hill will strike on his head. But my arrows thrown by Kiriti (Arjuna) shall not penetrate any further into him.”
Thereupon a terrible shower of rocks fell from the sky all around. It was discharged by the Rakshasas, who were strong as ten times their ordinary strength and it lasted for half an hour more than usual.
Beholding these Rākşasas come, the graceful and effulgent descendant of Raghu said to his brother Lakshmana.
The knowledge of his mind and the house was known to me. I knew all sorts of food, drink and every sort of eatable article that he had in his house.
Seeing that one of mild behaviour brought down and deprived by Brahma of his Lakshmi, the highly powerful (Yama) reproached him with these words.
What is knowledge, what are the objects of it? And who is he that has attained perfection and also he that has not yet acquired such a state? Who again are those that practice penances? And how do they differ from others. When does the sun rise in full splendour (in the sky)? And when does he set? Are all things known or unknown? Some are said to be unchangeable while some change their forms! How can something which never existed before exist for ever after its appearance?
Some of them are like the six kinds of bees, some look as if they have been pierced by arrows and some again resemble those forests that appear in various forms.
The second month has already passed away during which I lived upon water alone. And the third month is passing by, O son of Pandu (in a similar manner).
Then all the dependents of that king, began to plunder his wealth. The heap (of wealth) thus reduced in size looked very beautiful.
Having first exhausted yourself and then your opponents, you have at last destroyed the ocean of battle. You are now drying up everything with your rays like a fire in summer.
Then Bhimasena pierced him with ten arrows and Duryodhana also, O sire, wounded his antagonist in return with twenty shafts.
The birth of those, and the descendants from their births, who have gone to that burning flame (of fire), cannot be numbered.
Then as a flag, let go from the machine and driven by the wind, appears in sight; so Pritha's son with his hundred elephants and horses looked like Surya surrounded by rays of light.
You can protect Rāma in the forest; what need I say of others, O you that confer honours?
The duties of the Shudra are thus clearly laid down. He is required to perform all those services which others cannot or will not do, and in consequence he may be said to purify himself by them without any loss to his religion; for if these acts were sinful then there would have been a great calamity to mankind when they first came into being on account of their own misdeeds.
And that one, enraged as a snake and sending forth great flames on every side, shot at Kritavarman an arrow resembling the rod of Yama.
A traveller, who takes rest in a lonely forest with his wife is worthy of being trusted. Therefore it should be known that women are very dangerous for men when they become lost (in the world).
A man, who is content with his own particular work and does it with all attention succeeds in acquiring success. Hear how one acquires success by being attached only to the performance of one's own duties.
Such penances, though rich in merit and performed at the top of a mountain peak or on an island, are not equal to even those which men perform under compulsion.
As if it were the purpose of Fate, that arrow discharged with great force and hurled by Karna in anger at Satyaki's car was baffled.
And Parikhas, and Sataghnis, and various other mechanical contrivances beautify the city of Lankā belonging to Ravana the wicked-souled.
The earth is adorned with Kadamba and Sarja trees, Arjuna creepers, and various kinds of lotuses. It looks as if the abode of a king in heaven.
O sire, the number of horses and chariots that were seen in those regions was like the number of trees with their tops burnt down by fire.
O Janardana, he never forgives the slaughter of Bhurisrava in battle. Go there where they have gone and urge your steeds forward."
The Rakshasa Bali then gave orders to all the nocturnal animals (to guard him). It was filled with smoke, incense and perfumes. O king of earth, it shone like a palace built by Indra himself. After having adored that god of gods as also all other deities, the monarch proceeded before Vyasa towards his treasure-chamber; he first worshipped the lord of wealth and bowed down to him and then offered to him various kinds of sweets made out of sugar-cane juice and clarified butter mixed together in due proportion. He next worshipped the guardians of jewels and gems and then the foremost Brahmanas present there; they were delighted at hearing their auspicious cries and grew hot from their energy. That best of Kuru race gladly took up those treasures for carrying them away. Then Yudhishthira collected many excellent golden vessels, plates of different shapes and sizes and pots and jars; thousands of large beautiful cups and bowls of various sorts; earthen water-pots of different colours, brass, silver and gold and numerous platters, dishes, pitchers, milk pails and vases of wood or copper. Mahachapa Putra guarded the treasury.
The monkey with a red countenance, who had held converse with you is now being burnt up by the flaming Laitha fruit.
Your presence in this world, O you of noble birth, has filled Rāma with grief like a elephant afflicted by the lion.
Hearing the words of that high-souled brother, Dasagrīva said.
Other said that you have committed a sin by seeing Garuda's wife. The lady then appeared in her own form for your going towards the forest; but as she was not seen, it is certain that this deed of yours has not been known to anybody.
The beautiful and powerful son of Srinjaya was named Sahadeva. Kushashva, the exceedingly virtuous son of Sahadeva.
Having offered his oblation of water and having bathed, he went up to the gods. He then duly fed Agni with libations of clarified butter and also invited Brahmanas to a feast in celebration of that particular festival called Parva.
By the red colour, by touch, taste and appearance of their blood which was flowing in streams on all sides; also because they were being killed in battle.
Therefore the great god himself, called Agni (fire), assuming a female form disappeared there and then.
Vaishampayana said : O king, at this time the wise Vidura sent an honest man of pure soul to that forest.
Vasudeva said : Bhishma, that foremost of men is lying down on his bed made out of arrows like a fire put out; and he is thinking about me. My mind also has been taken away by him.
On this, O mighty monarch the foremost of ascetics Vasishtha said. “Create a terrible race."
By pouring libations of clarified butter in the sacred fire and by offering food, that god (Agni) attains to supreme happiness.
You are the refuge of all those royal sages who have performed pious deeds, and never fled from battle; you are their (Brahma's) equal in virtue. O best among men, you are he whom they seek as a refuge after acquiring religious merit by observing various modes of worship; you are the lord; you are supreme being; you are the soul which pervades every creature; it is through your grace that creatures move about.
Vaishampayana said : Thus addressed by the son of Pandu, in presence of those Rishi that illustrious and highly ascetic Markandeya thus spoke.
Hearing these words of Hanumān, Hrishikesh took the form of a cat and sat on his back. And Hari in that shape began to live under water.
Duryodhana, ever doing good to the kings of earth and adoring those foremost of Brahmanas by means of great sacrifices with profuse Dakshinas.
And having assembled together, the great Indra gave out his benediction, saying that Narayana is the refuge of all and also he who takes away fear.
It is useless for you, therefore, O Rāma's sister-in-law, to be dispirited. Do not grieve; there will never arise in the three worlds a man who shall conquer Raghava either when he was born or while growing up.
Saying, "Do you live with me," he was constantly keeping him awake. And one day a Brahmana, free from all anxiety entered his room.
O Yudhishthira, the whole world shall become Mleccha (barbarous). Men will not be able to please their gods by Shraddhas.
Saluting that Rudra, who is unborn and inconceivable; who has no origin or end; whose form cannot be described by words; who is the soul of all causes; whom none can understand fully except himself; (Arjuna) worshipped with great reverence that deity having eyes like lotus petals.
O goddess, you are very kind. Quickly go and find Shakra (Indra). Do me a favour." The great Rishi Brihaspati thus spoke these words to her;
The son of Pandu was about to shoot his arrows at that bow, but thinking (of the high-souled Phalguna), he stopped.
The heads of those warriors, with the armour on them and adorned with ear-rings, dropped down on earth when struck by Karna's arrows. They fell like a forest cut-down at one stroke (of an axe).
The gentle breeze does not blow; the moon is seen in no cheerful aspect, and the sun also has ceased to shine. Everything appears strange to me.
This is the way of persons who are without any understanding. Listen now, I shall tell you what men endued with intelligence do in matters relating to virtue and happiness as also about those that seek liberation (from all worldly attachments).
Having seen this unfortunate condition of your own strength, you are not sorry that you have been abandoned by friends and relatives.
Thereupon, Shishupala determined to punish her for such an unrighteous act. He thought that it was proper to give back the punishment due to a wrong-doer in equal measure.
Having defeated Drona in battle, the highly powerful son of Pandu (Abhimanyu) became tired and his hands were numbed by many a shafts.
This fowler of the daughter of Videha, O bird, will come here near me; and this one is a great hunter.
The Pandavas, the Chedis and Panchalas and Yadus all together with the Bharatas are going to fight. What can be more painful than this?
Is the graceful lord of monkeys, Sugriva, with those foremost monkey heroes armed with nails and teeth still loyal to me?
Having said this, all the kings were suddenly seized with fear; and then that highly energetic Karna rushed against Jishnu in battle.
While the hero was thus speaking, that lion inflamed with rage pierced his vitals and limbs with sharp claws.
On being thus struck by Hanumān, Nikumbha began to tremble. And he at once gave up the idea of taking that mighty monkey in his embrace.
They are dwarfs, they have broad shoulders and short necks. Some of them become eunuchs; some again become blind or deaf; the eyes of others being very large.
Taking up a child of his race in the womb, that lord of all creatures, Maruta (the Wind-god), entered into Guha's house. And like Vasava checking by means of rain the prosperity of all beings and causing them great distress, he stopped all those people from their natural functions for some time.
O king, as she was always weeping in grief. Be pleased with me and give vent to your words of comfort.
You wish to go on a journey which is beyond the reach of men. As an inane child wishes to cross over from his bank (to another) when he can neither swim nor move himself, so you desire to do what you are incapable of doing."
Thereupon the swans began sporting in every part of that charming forest. And each girl ran against her respective Swan,
The highly illustrious Bhimasena then smiling, in that battle advanced against Karna and quickly discharged at him eighty arrows.
Then the uproar of men and their shouts mingled with the rattle of chariots, made a noise that resembled the roar of an ocean.
Some of them eat in the Shukla Paksha only milk, barley and kusha grass boiled once.
Then taking up another bow, Vrikodara (Bhima) the learned in all things of life and the son of a charioteer pierced Suta's son on his vital parts with sharp arrows. O king, he roared like thunder and shook the very earth itself.
Then seeing the prowess of Vritra, Angirasa's son and those great Rishis went up to Maheshvara for destroying him.
Let it be so. I shall now tell you of your son the king Yudhishthira, if I can go on earth." Thus spoke Pandu's wife (Kunti).
Hearing Sītā's words, Hanumān-the son of Maruta-raising his head in a bend and folding together the palms, said.
Brahmadatta, the king of Panchala and that foremost of all virtuous men, having blown his conch went away into a high state.
Phlegm, bile, sweat and fat as also blood are always in the bodies of living creatures.
And seeing and touching the king, Kausalyā and Sumitră, calling him “O lord,” fell down on earth.
O descendant of Bharata, Yudhishthira checked him with his arms and said “Don't do this. Be contented."
And the mighty-armed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi and permitted by that great Rishi entered into his mansion furnished with gems. The ministers also together with priests followed him; they were all delighted on seeing this beautiful abode made for them (by Sugriva).
The wall of the palace was made of gold, and its defence could not be broken. It had a forest of jewels for its gates; it was covered with diamonds, sapphires and other gems.
And with Sāla, Tala and Tamála trees; and the excellent sandal wood.
Hearing the words of that cat, O king, a mouse became frightened and entered into his hole. Then bathing there he came out again;
Then as if enraged they entered into him like so many infuriate snakes entering a hole; and the son of Radha, piercing Bhimasena with fourteen shafts furnished with wings made wholly of gold, all shot off without taking aim.
And as if burning (in wrath), with red eyes, the heroic Rāghava rushing impetuously against that Raksasa cheerfully cheered all his monkeys oppressed by Kumbhakarna.
Having got this knowledge, I am neither delighted nor grieved. Like wood in the great ocean which coming together disappear again into nothingness, all things of this world are also like that when they come and go.
With blood flowing in profusion, it looked like a dark and dreadful fire-wheel. And the sun being caught by that wheel of fire.
He, who for a hundred months worships daily the Deities with undiminished vigour and energy is not excited by anger. But he that is angry even after having worshipped them (for such length of time), surpasses both in wrath.
Having said this, Rākşasa in a jesting way spoke more terrible words about the battle.
Nor did any of them abandon their weapons, armour and bows or throw off the wreaths from their head. Trembling in fear they stood with folded hands on earth;
An officer should be heroic and possessed of intelligence. By their help, O king, you can achieve your objects connected with the kingdom.
The Pandavas, then desirous of returning (home), waited for some time; and having conquered their own souls, they were ready to set out.
And the roads were obstructed with detachments of troops. It was not possible for Shalva's army, O king, to get out through those narrow passes.
For a thousand years they vomited venomous serpents, their necks adorned with golden collars. But the stones were not bitten by them in return.
Why is he not answering me who am thus speaking? There was a righteous monkey by name Sugrīva, the foremost of monkeys; that hero is now living in sorrow on account of his brother's treachery.
Thereupon the lord Partha, by means of his bow began to shower arrows on all sides upon his foes as Purandara (Indra) showers rain.
Protected by that foremost of car-warriors, the son of Drona and Karna and Krupa (Kripacharya) he was living in his camp with fear.
The semen which is produced in the body and comes out from it, originates as a result of an act of will.
O king, he obtained all the weapons at once. When all those had been obtained by him, he next acquired Brahma weapon of great power.
Then, O slayer of hostile heroes, Vibhatsu (Arjuna), beholding Ketuvarman approaching in battle, pierced him with many sharp arrows.
He had then addressed me thus, “Remember me when in distress." I will remember him if you desire it.
When the high-souled Deity had said so, the celestial drums began to beat and flowers were showered from heaven.
Therefore, I do not fear the Rishi Durvasa. He was frightened before by your energy and has run away in alarm.
O descendant of Bharata, I then saw the elephants, covered with mud and moving like clouds in a shower.
O son, you do not worship this wind which is the foremost of all living creatures. Why? By your lightness of understanding!
The Parthas, with all their troops, advanced against those two heroes (Drona and Karna), who were repeatedly uttering war-cries.
These friends of yours, who are so fond of you and talk sweetly with you in seclusion, become the fathers (of your sons) when they perform religious rites on behalf of their children. They act as mothers towards them when these last are afflicted by distress or calamity.
As the fire does not destroy that which is naturally its own, so a man of sinful soul cannot be destroyed by covetousness.
O great king, then those women said that the deeds of Krishna were not fruitless and her vows had been observed.
O mighty monarch, for ten days in that battle he had slaughtered thousands of car-warriors. But at last he was reduced with exhaustion.
O king of the celestials, he who has a son like him (Virochana), I do not grieve for that. That which is my own downfall, does not pain me much; thus have I decided in my mind and am obeying the commandment of Shakra.
At the end of a Yuga, all friends and relations become food for fire. Then men will not have any companionship in this world; at that time famine shall prevail over the entire earth with its various countries, cities and ancient towns, as also it prevails upon their bodies (with hunger). Men then, when they see one another, will say O son! O child! Thus harsh words will be spoken by them.
There is no fault in making peace with foes, and there should be perpetual peace. But I am grieved for my father who was ever endued with wisdom and the lord of men (as he died).
Seeing Satyaki enter the battle, what did Duryodhana think? He certainly thought that it was a fit opportunity for him.
How, O good man, can one take refuge with a person who does not allow his followers and dependents to have food? Why did you come here for your livelihood.
And the same fate awaits those men who have abandoned their bodies, for they also are subject to dissolution like yourself. Those persons on earth that make gifts of wealth and other things which are holy,
The Vedas speak of the immortality of celestials and also about their boons, acts which have been enjoyed by them in this world.
Elephants are delighted with the cows; and deer, lions, tigers and other animals. The hills appear charming on account of their being covered with water. Even Suras themselves seem happy when they see rivers full of waters after a long drought.
Shaunaka said Tell me fully, O learned Rishi, how king Janamejaya, when he asked his father Vyasa about the way by which the latter had gone up into heaven, obtained that information.
Hear from me the means of stopping pain, which is caused by grief and other passions proceeding either from mind or body.
I have no friend in the three worlds equal to that son of Pandu; and, O king, what I tell you is true.
The illustrious son of Kunti, the king Yudhishthira was not aware that Shveta's horse had been stolen by him. He did nothing but follow his own inclinations which were followed also by those two virtuous sons of Madri (Nakula and Sahadeva).
O king, the fallen is lamented and so also a person who has become poor. I cannot however perceive any difference between them as regards their wealth or poverty.
There lived a dear friend of Brahman, named Nadijangha. He was also the king of camels and he was very learned. That camel-born son of Kashyapa (Kashyap's younger brother) had been born on earth for his own welfare.
Indra said : Thinking of Kurukshetra, Gaya and Gangas, Prabhasa, Pushkaras by one's mind, one can be freed from sins like the moon being cleansed (of Rahu).
Then that highly wise one, thinking of the future and his son Uttara (together) began to think who would be able to perform this feat.
You should not be ashamed of your action, but you must be proud of it. A man is considered a hero by his courage and energy.
A man, who makes a number of sacrificial stakes at the beginning and end of his sacrifice acquires numerous kine.
And the heroes, without showing their arrows there in that battle, covered Bhima with them as clouds cover up the sun rising.
One day that ascetic saw a Brahmana who was selling flesh of animals and other meats, he also saw the whole market place crowded with buyers.
Then taking with him a large force, that consisted of many cars and other vehicles, Vrikodara placed Vibhatsu on his right hand side and Darsaka on the left.
O Shakra, you should not do this; it behoves you therefore to be calm. Knowing that your intentions are thus I shall very soon depart from here."
He who has not acquired the right of a householder should not light up his hearth; he should never take in such persons as are devoid of wealth and faith, or robbers.
O Keshava, what has been given me by my father in his lifetime can never be got again so long as I live.
O Lord, having covered the Earth with their hoof-printed bodies (and those of elephants and horses), they follow me.
The Brahmana said O king, let us today make a present of the three-eyed and high-souled Mahadeva. Having made this gift, do you then follow your own interest.
With Yuyudhana and Pradyumna with his mace, Nishatha also as well as Samvha and Kritavarman.
The king said : There is no thief in my kingdom, there is none who takes bribes; and I have not a drunkard among my subjects.
Good betide you. O king, go away; your city is lost and victory yours! And take possession of that great ancestral kingdom which will last for many long nights."
Thereupon, the king, filled with delight and without any delay, collected all his forces in proper order.
If a Brahmana is found guilty of any offence, he must be punished by the king. This was done in days gone by; it has been sanctioned by all virtuous men.
Then that foremost of the Bharatas, waxing worth with Shakuni struck him sixty times and again in that conflict he pierced his adversary on his breast with hundreds of arrows.
And the lord, Dasharatha, was highly delighted on beholding his son (Rāma) dearer than life itself. Then that mighty-armed one embracing Răma seated him in a car and began to speak thus:-
And for my sake, O lord of men, the exceedingly effulgent Rāghava has entered into a great calamity. Renouncing all his desires he lives in woods.
Neither the son of Ganga, nor Drona himself, nor Gautama is aware (of this). Nor O king are you and Suta's son.
Then, O foremost of the Bharata race, that hero with his Gandiva bow and those arrows shot from it made all these shafts without any effect.
Then the officers, craftsmen and others on behalf of king Yudhishthira described all those rites which should be performed in a sacrifice.
When Sumitra's son, thus spoke Rāma was seized with grief and said. "O you of mild speech, it is a sinful act that without your wife you have come here."
Here, the Samans of sacred and melodious tones were sung by Marichi Pulaha Bhrgu and Angiras.
Do not weep, O you having eyes resembling lotus-petals. What the destroyer of Madhu has said will take place for this lady of fair complexion and beauty; nothing else, O beautiful one!
O sire, we saw his car with its horses and charioteer in a state of complete destruction like that of an elephant killed by the tuskers.
Vasishtha said : O foremost of rivers, carry me across you; I am a swift-goer. Vishvamitra will surely be pleased with you if you do not exercise your choice in the matter."
Hearing these words of the king Dasaratha, that great Rishi said in sweet accents:-“Do you hear what will befall him. This dreadful and divine misfortune has come from a bird; do not grieve any longer for this loss."
When his wealth was thus taken away from him, the Brahmana became maddened with rage. Coming up at last to Khandavaprastha he began to cry aloud in grief before all the sons of Pandu.
O king, those heroes encountered each other in battle and wounded one another with their sharp arrows whetted on stone.
Then, like so many deer at the roar of a lion in the forest, all those elephants ran away uttering terrible and loud cries.
The night is gone and we have heard the high story. Let us cross this best of sacred rivers, having three channels.
I shall follow you. With your army, my self will accompany you. Do you rescue Satyaki who is within the jaws of Yama."
Thereupon, O monarch, the powerful Bhimasena baffled that shower of shafts and cut off his bow. Then waxing worth, he pierced Dushasana with hundreds of arrows.
That assemblage of lotuses looked like a garland on the breast of that mountain, made up of swans and cranes and decorated with the flowers called Chakravaka.
O Rāma, of you observing great vows and fearing the censures that may be passed by men I shall certainly give back Sītă; do you permit me.
Therefore, since you were born, a person of restrained soul should always sleep with his wife on a bed-stead made up of Kusha grass.
And houses, large and beautiful as they are furnished with choice women, appear like great mountains shaken by the weight of their gems.
The second birth is the most horrible of births. Those creatures that are born from earth, O best of twice-born ones, at certain times, forsooth those creatures called Udbhijja by the learned Brahmanas and all other animals with two legs or four feet or three legs or five limbs, as also those born from wombs, they who have been deformed on account of old age, these again, o foremost of Brahmana's may be said to belong to one class only originating in Brahma and existing eternally; this is known among persons conversant with learning to be the fruit of their penances and good deeds done in former lives.
O monkey, your grief on account of my absence seems greater than that which I felt before; and it does not appear as if you are able now to bear the heavy burden.
Elephants, with their armour pierced by arrows resembling the thunder-bolt itself or even more fierce than that weapon of Indra's. Drooped down like so many mountains when struck with lightning.
O beautiful damsel, tell me who you are and whose daughter; how have you come here from where? And also relate the cause of your coming.
That best of virtuous persons, that descendant of Vrishni race, endued with great energy and pride befitting his birth, smilingly said these words bending low in respect to Kunti.
Dhritarashtra said Your wisdom is like that of Bhargava and you know the subtlest religion. You are approved by all Kauravas as well as me, tell us what they consider proper and also what we should do?
Thus having transferred all his powers and lordship of the celestials with Shachi, O mighty-armed one you appeared in this world as Keshava among men.
In a moment twenty thousand Brahmanas, all of them decked in celestial ornaments and attired in excellent dresses were sent by the king.
Hearing these words of his, Yudhishthira the just said : 'Well spoken.'
That which is thought by me, as being the result of my own desire for victory over foes and obtaining wealth and pleasure in this world should be always suspected. This every wise man knows well."
Vaishampayana said : Having invited the king of Righteousness and having obtained his permission, O Bharata, those two friends went away with their followers.
Do you try your best, O foremost of men. In the very beginning did I bring about the destruction of the monkey host by means of my shafts.
The hair of the head, and also those on other parts of the body; the skin; bones and sinews; all these are known as organs (of sense).
Hearing the words of his wives, that lord of men out of love for them forgave and pardoned his son who had been disobedient.
One may live for a long time without any food, but one cannot live for ever by abstaining from it.
And with Sugriva at their head, all those present (in Rāvana's abode) were eager to behold the son of Dasaratha intent upon ascending heaven.
The hair and the teeth are worn out by time, but not thirst.
Then the wind, blowing in gusts from Malaya and Dardura,* began to blow gently. *Malaya-the mountains of Ceylon; also a mountain on the coast near Cape Comorin (Kanyakumari).
The dart, O king, fell down at the breast of that foremost twice-born one and he became highly agitated. Tremors came over him (also).
Seeing those best of men, afflicted with grief and about to embark on the boat in the Ganges (for proceeding towards heaven), he again addressed them thus.
He who wishes may drink wine, he also that is thirsty may take curds. And meat of every kind which one likes to eat may be eaten by him."
Vyasa said : O king, when time shall have come round you and other kings (the Kauravas), meeting one another in battle will begin to slay one another.
If you think that the protection of your son has been effected, be blessed. I will follow Bibhatsu and carry out what you have said (to me).
Having taken the wealth from these, that best of men, having worshipped Mahadeva and being ordered by Dwaipayana with his priest at their head set out for Naga's city.
Why are you intent upon slaying those two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, the sons of Dasaratha, who have entered Dandaka with Sita? Those ascetics leading Brahmacharya life, living on fruits and roots in peace in that forest, what harm can they do (to others)?
Beholding those innumerable and compacted divisions of the foe, with their many banners on the field, that slayer of enemies-the son of Matsya-consulting Virata said these words.
With cars and horses rushing here and there, with men running on foot the battle field looked like a mass of clouds.
O son of Kunti, do not roar in vain like the autumnal clouds. Show your prowess while it is still left with you."
O you that are so good, it is for this reason I have come back here after having deceived you in the river. Come on and let us together drink blood which looks like clarified butter and smells as sweet as lotuses."
Those that are subsisted by the dead bodies of others, always meet with hell; do not therefore become one like them. Be it so."
Thereupon the Sutas, who were versed in singing eulogies and songs of welcome to their guests began to sing these verses.
Your sons, the great carwarriors were being slain in battle and they all began fighting with Bhima who was of fearful prowess.
Thereupon, O monarch, Sahadeva of unmitigated prowess having cheered up his brother, wounded Shakuni with ten shafts and also his steeds with three. Then as if smiling the son of Subala cut off the bow-string of Sahadeva's weapon.
Having considered for a moment, the Gandharva said "Well." And then he remained silent.
One should always speak of those qualities which are desirable in a Brahmana. He who has been thus described, sits silent when he hears the faults of others and is engaged in helping himself.
When men are thirsty and when they have been pleased, the torch bearers show them a path which is attended with happiness.
O descendant of Bharata, seeing the sons of Pandu endowed with all accomplishments, people began in assemblies to speak about their merits.
Thereat, the troops of Bhimasena were broken; and then again the heroic Satyaki with many others assailed it.
Thereupon, O king, that high-souled ascetic became disgusted with the practice of penances and then by his austerities he obtained those excellent Vedas.
If you serve your husband, if there is asceticism in the conduct of your life and if this practice of one wife be true then become cool.
Thereupon going round Drona, the mighty-armed Arjuna began to discharge arrows. And Vibhatsu, having surrounded him and discharged his shafts,
Began breathing with difficulty and his breath became hot. In the meanwhile, O king, he threw at Suta's son fourteen Narachas having broad blades and golden coverings; Bhimasena also hurled four Narakas against that highly powerful hero (Karna). Those gold plated Nara-cas piercing through Karna's armour of great splendour
And encircled by showers of arrows, twenty-five thousand foot-soldiers without cars and horses rushed upon Partha.
Thereupon that king, conversant with Mantras addressed those Brahmanas thus, I shall celebrate a sacrifice; let all of you procure for me the requisites.
Then that one endowed with dreadful prowess, resembling the Destroyer himself in strength and energy, taking up a mountain peak headed by four peaks, hurled it at Bhima.
Then that army, of Duryodhana's side greatly rejoiced with great delight on hearing the news about Arjuna and his intention for doing away with Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.
The Pitris said : O you who move in the sky, this question that has been asked by you is highly wonderful and difficult of being solved.
O son of Gavalaya, the king who is on his way westward or eastward shall be considered as going towards his south.
This destruction of the sons of Pritha has been brought about by our own folly and not at all through the agency of Asuras, Gandharvas, Yakshas or Rakshases.
Those persons who are subject to various sorts of delusion and whose minds are enveloped with ignorance, become attached to the enjoyment of objects which they think beautiful or agreeable. They fall into hell from this attachment.
Listen, O Kunti! of the story relating to Sharadvindani. That hero's wife was engaged by her preceptor for begetting a son on him.
Beholding that destroyer of foes, the auspicious one (Rāma), he was rejoiced and embraced his husband. And beholding those Raksasas slain and seeing her lord ever undecaying, Janaka's daughter was highly delighted.
By the marriage of Duryodhana with a Gandharvi, O lord, by force and through the intercourse that is inevitable between man and wife our race will be exterminated.
And being thus placed in a critical position, that foremost of Rākşasas with his senses overwhelmed by grief began lament.
Those arrows with wings of the colour of gold, that mace and other weapons all fell on earth when those two (Rāma and Lakşmana) had been deprived of their arms. And then he thought himself without any weapon; and stretching forth his hands in anger began to make havoc thereat.
The persons who, out of anger or from being wicked and afflicted with diseases or weak in strength, give us what we do not want for their real value should be considered as having failed (in the business) both here and hereafter.
Having thus behaved like a Chandala, you should have asked me what I am going to say. Why did you not ask? What are your harsh words for?
Seeing their soldiers routed, I think that your sons are grieved and despondent at the thought of defeat.
O Somitra, Pampā looks beautiful with its water as transparent and clear as the Vaidūrya gem. It is filled with lotuses in full bloom and adorned by various trees (in their season).
Vaishampayana said : Having thus spoken, the highly effulgent Vyasa went away. Kausalya was seated on a bed with pure and clean robes; she sat there adorned in all her ornaments. The sage had vanished within his own body by Yoga power. When he had gone away, that princess saw him coming out of hiding. She addressed those words full of morality and good sense to the maiden who came along with her as an attendant. “O daughter-in-law listen to me while I tell you what is for your well-being.”
Thus released from those three fetters, O son of Kunti a man begins to acquire his own good and attains then the highest end.
That best of men, then went there and saw the wealth and treasures which were kept in that Tirtha. And giving away all those riches properly he gave them to many Brahmanas.
If the wife be protected, then she is able to protect all her children. And if his wives and sons are wellprotected by him, he himself is sure of being properly looked after in return.
That wicked wretch, having carried away a number of children while playing with them in the streets and throwing them into Sarayu river is enjoying himself.
Hearing those words of his, Vali's son spoke thus,-The two monkeys, the offspring of Hara, endowed with great speed and strength.
Then the lord of all bowmen, Hrishikesha (Krishna), Arjuna who was ever engaged in performing true deeds and Yudhishthira the king of Kurus.
Seeing that charming and excellent mansion, having all the comforts of heaven and furnished with flowering trees Gautama became very much pleased.
Vaishampayana said : Thereupon, that best of Brahmanas was pleased and accosted by him. He then gave him a stern answer showing the true meaning of royal science (politics).
And with some of them who had been wounded on the back and sides, that high-souled son of Drona then brought away those others whose heads were cut off or otherwise mangled.
In this place were many Bila trees, Kapithas and Panasa's full of seeds. There also grew many Amalakas with their fruits on them;
When Karna was slain, the warriors of your army became as much distressed as merchants whose boats are broken in a deep sea.
And as the lord, resembling a burning fire came there those people worshipped him.
That man who, for a year worships the lotus-eyed one (Krishna), obtains remembrance of his birth and acquires great wealth.
As you have seen Shakra, the illustrious holder of Pinaka and as he has been propitiated by your son with weapons.
Sanjaya said Having thus spoken, the highly powerful (Bhima) went away with gifts for Yudhisthira and Dhrishtadyumna as also many other friends.
O beautiful damsel, go there. Your father has been saved by his sons and four kings as also I have come here for your rescue.
O king of Nishadhas, I shall tell you how Damayanti will never look at any other man.
Then the mighty bowman Savyasachin quickly went by Ashvathaman who was then bearing the standard of the royal elephant and spoke thus.
The wife of Pandu, who was not yet chaste when she entered the assembly-hall, had been lost at dice by Shakuni in accordance with his own plan.
I shall try for both of you and if possible, make a permanent friendship between the two.
O son of Sumitra, let the preceptor of the Taittiriya recension come here with his daughter and wife. Let him be given a vehicle and attendants. And till he is satisfied let clothes made of Kousha silk be distributed among all present."
The limbs of that lady were delicate like those of a young deer; her eyes and eyebrows, the corners of which resembled lotus leaves, shone in their loveliness. Her countenance was as beautiful as moonlight reflected on the waters or as the rays of the sun seen through clouds; it looked charming with its fine teeth (that seemed) like mountains crowns, large forehead, excellent complexion and attractive gait.
If, with a thousand pieces of gold and whatever else I may possess in riches, were daily spent at dawn and dusk for the space of many years together. And if all my golden ornaments, as also all my other wealth in gems and clothes, chariots yoked by horses or steeds or cars drawn by mules and camels and elephants, be consumed up one after another; still would not my fortune come to an end."
All the misfortunes, which have been predicted by wise men about this great army are already taking place. It is said that there can be no greater calamity for an intelligent man than a division in his own forces.
In the midst of that forest, is a tree with branches. Its fragrance is delightful and it is very high. From its root springs numerous streams running over honey and sugar cane.
The celestials were highly astonished and the entire universe paid homage to Karna.
Thereupon taking up his bow, made of the wood called Ahindaka and furnished with innumerable knots. I pierced that terrible creature which caused hair to stand erect on end.
When the monkey had fixed his arrows and was about shooting them, a loud noise of bow-strings made all on both sides tremble.
And all the gods and celestials, as also all the Maharșis present there, looked at him who had gone for fetching that best of rice.
He also learnt the art of pleasing his master by means of silence, abstention from speech and obedience; he served him with every kind of work.
The king, having been thus adored with Mantras according to due rites and forms, became filled with great joy. Then his mother, after seeing him seated on a seat of honour, asked him about the welfare of himself and all others.
And the deities, seated there, began to hold consultations. All of them had practised asceticism and were united with their vows; so also Narayana thus spoke to Brahman who was sitting at that time in company with those celestials engaged in consultation on all subjects connected with Ambrosia.
Thus, wandering about in various countries and regions the king created numerous gods as described by Vedas.
Then the son of Suta cut-off with numerous arrows that high-souled and highly powerful Bhima; when he was thus killed by him,
Atri desired children but could not get them; and therefore he kept all those which were born in his own body. But the fire that was used for offering libations (to sacred fires) carried away from him, what Brahman had given to him as a gift.
The persons, who live by fish and meat and milk of the Ajaika cow (that is produced from a bull) in this Yuga which comes after that of Parusavara will become enemies. Those men also, who are always devoted to truthfulness and purity, who take only what they need for their maintenance, and who perform sacrifices with ghee churned out of curd made out of kine's milk or drawn out of butter taken from the stomachs of goats and sheep, will be overtaken by desire at such time; therefore let not all acts proceed unchecked!
And coming out, the king of great strength and effulgence Divodasa gave them a terrible fight like that between the celestials and Asuras.
He assumed the form of a beautiful damsel. O you having fair complexion, if your husband be so fortunate as to get for his wife one like yourself, then this life of yours will not go in vain; and it is also sure that he will acquire beauty (like ours). We have seen many men among gods, Gandharvas, Asuras, human beings and Rakshasas but none equal to him (in beauty); therefore do you unite with him who excels all others both amongst women and men and thereby achieve great merit by virtue of your union with such an excellent person."
You, O Krishna know all these troubles and the destruction of our kingdom which is not far off as also what measures are best in such a crisis.
Having a golden umbrella, the chariot had its back part decorated with gems and pearls; it looked like an archway.
O descendant of Bharata, the conclusion that was come at by him (Kumbhakarna) who lived constantly in virtue and duty is this,-that very soon Sarasvati will bring before me ascetic Vashishtha, foremost among all performers of penances. And having arrived here, I shall without doubt destroy that best of Brahmanas.
Then, having known that Rāma of exceeding prowess was wandering in the forest and bearing malice for his former enmity with me (Bhima), I came there like a deer sporting on its high horns.
In the month of Poush, O Brahmana, when people desire to study Vedas and perform their religious rites. The proper time has come for reciting Samans.
The army then, after avoiding the cremation grounds and sacred places as also woods full of thorns, took up its quarters on a bank.
The son of Kunti saw also a thorny shrub, called Kutashalmali, which is very painful and full of sharp spikes.
And having entered the city of Lankā and her inner apartments, Răvaņa saw Sītā; and had a conversation with her; and consoled her.
One acquires a foot in the first place; then he gains an article of wealth. He next obtains another, and after that still another by virtue of his good deeds done formerly or of his observance of religious rites which are ordained for him according to the scriptures.
What is the use of a second advice when your sister, who had gone into exile with her husband has been carried away by that wicked king of Sindhu.
Therefore we have sought your protection, since the wind has overpowered us. O destroyer of sorrow do you remove this trouble caused by the wind.'
O king, Lakshmi had come among the gods and Alakshmi has come amongst men. They who are possessed by her have their minds blinded with pride.
O descendant of Bharata, he roamed through various ways and round about the Mandala. Thereupon Vrikodara appeared more beautiful than ever before.
He was of great size; he had long arms and huge body. And his strength was also very much. His face looked frightful, he had a rough touch.
Shakuni also, O king, having pierced Bhima with three arrows and covered Sahadeva with ninety shafts.
They (the inhabitants of Dvārakā) daily, according to the injunctions laid down in books on ethics and morality as also the ordinances regarding seasons, poured water mixed with sandal paste into golden vessels.
That hero shines in that assembly of bowmen as the wind, shining on account of its great velocity and power, looks beautiful in the firmament.
I have gratified the gods and Rishis with my power. Know, O descendant of Kuru, that there is a being named Guha who has an immeasurable energy in his six faces (heads). He is gifted with great strength; he is armed with weapons,
Beholding that high-souled one of superhuman prowess, they were afraid and could not utter a word.
I ask of you a hundred thousand sons, all possessed of firmness in virtue and prowess on the field; all distinguished by high renown; endued with great strength; devoted to Yoga practices.
Having been pierced with thousands of arrows, elephants began to flow copiously in blood like the Gauri and Kambusa rivers during rainy season.
O Partha, who is there that would indulge in grief for his own self when the enemy have been killed like Indra having slain those demons of great strength.
O monkey, you are the grandson of Prajapati and son of Avikara. You have got both patience and manliness; therefore do not grieve (over this).
Beholding Karna thus, the son of Pandu's face grew red with anger and his eyes became blood-shot. He then quickly rushed against him in great joy and covered him with a heavy shower of arrows.
Then Sumitra's son addressed that monkey, the minister of Sugrīva and acquainted with words, in sweet accents and full of affection.
You will be equal with your sons and wives; do not, therefore, give way to grief. I tell you this truly."
And having for a moment reflected, that one wrought up with grief and wrath, seeing her husband before her, said in anger. "O great monarch! why are you speaking thus? I do not know what you mean." Like an ordinary person (the lady) put no faith on the king's words.
Vidura said : O king, this has been described by those who are learned in the science of liberation. A man acquires great merit through that which is productive of good and leads him to heaven.
Are you not stupefied with Sauti? Did he not tell you of the great battle that took place between Shalya and Bhishma,
The fleet horses, yoked with the car of king Duryodhana began to descend from that place, at their pleasure on a field covered all over with flowers and in which there was no obstruction.
O Anjana, the most beautiful and noble daughter of Gavana was desirous of gathering fruits from that forest having a sky like the colour of an umbrella.
Never did I meet with defeat in battle, and this you have seen. What need is there of telling any falsehood about it?
Those mountains, that are produced from the rays of your sun and which have different colours and great weight, will be seen here as if they had been shaken by some earthquake.
The fruits of three sorts of actions, viz., those that are not agreeable, those which one wishes for and those which arise from the mixture of both, do not affect ascetics who have renounced everything.
Learning that the Wind-god's son had departed, Maithili with her voice choked up by tears said.
Thus all those cows, with their calves and kine, began to bewail piteously like she-goats.
Vaishampayana said : O descendant of Bharata, after having performed all the necessary rites for her son and comforted your two daughters-in-law as also Bhishma that foremost among wielders of weapons; then did Satyavati, who was anxious to get a son (for herself) become very sorrowful. Then considering the merits of Dharma in his own race on one hand and those of Bhrigu's daughter on another and thinking highly of Shantanu the illustrious king of Kuru whose fame had been established by his piety, she spoke thus to Ganga's son-"By you has the lineage of Dharmaraja Sanjaya been perpetuated."
When that high-souled one had sat down, his attendants brought him costly ornaments of all descriptions.
O Brahmana, the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas have killed one another in battle. There were those that had maces for their arms and there again others with clubs as their weapons. They have all been slain by each other's arrows; do you behold this change of destiny! Five hundred thousand men armed only with bare hands were also slain after they encountered one another.
The Pandavas, having obtained that mighty army with the aid of Krishna (Draupadi) and all other persons in it.
The ministers said : O king, that best of all wielders of weapons and the foremost ruler on earth (your father) was always fond of hunting. As your great armed son is now, he also used to be so; and as that one of strong arms who was ever a mighty bowman in battle, he too used to take part with us in our royal duties.
Jarasandha said : I do not remember the time when you made war on me. Reflecting, however, about your present conduct towards myself and my kingdom,
This is my nature, this is the innate weakness of mine. It cannot be removed by any one.
A man cannot have any happiness without going up (to heaven). Even if he lives, it is difficult for him ever after obtaining anything of value.
Then going back (to the hermitage) he slept on a bed and other comforts; then having burnt his daughter adorned with ornaments, he went away.
The son of Pandu appeared on that beautiful car, made up with the best jewels and pearls and corals and sapphires and gems. He then looked like the moon in a clear sky full of stars.
With that arrow which is difficult of being baffled, and with the aid of his restless bow-string (he shot it off), he pierced in that forest a huge tree as if for catching some deer.
Thus accosted, the energetic and pious Kakutstha, ever fond of virtue (Rāma) smilingly answered Sugrīva.
The Vedas, the various modes of life and all sorts of objects acquire their end by being worshipped with devotion.
The forces of Ravana and those of the king met. And as if burnt in a sacrificial fire, all his men became lifeless. And fighting for some time he (Rāvana) displayed his excellent prowess; but on being assailed by him flaming like fire, he was soon killed along with his host like insects entering into flames.
O descendant of Bharata, seeing me thus advance they (the Pandavas) thought that I was coming on their account and therefore all those great car-warriors with horses and elephants and foot-soldiers, mounted speedily and fled away from fear.
Then those two heroes, both of whom were the foremost car-warriors and who had no fear in battle, covered that sky with their arrows as they revolved on all sides like clouds at the end of a rainy season.
He covered the four points with arrows as long as a chariot and then entered into that night which was called the destroyer of heroes.
On the death of that great car-warrior, Drona's son-the mighty charioteer of the Panchalas-wounded with sharp arrows by Arjuna and thus defeated in battle.
The second foot is his (the preceptor's) dear one, for whom he may even give up life and wealth. His disciple is the half of all that belongs to him in thought, word or deed.
Vaishampayana said : When the night passed away, those Brahmanas of spotless deeds began their journey. But they stopped at a place where there was food for them.
Having slain all his steeds and cut into pieces that hundred-spoked chariot of Satyaki, Karna began to pour down upon him a shower of arrows like the clouds pouring rain.
Narada said He who, having heard this sacred and auspicious science which is the destroyer of sorrow, succeeds in understanding it acquires happiness.
There are also many other sacred and excellent streams, O king of kings. In the midst of those rivers there is one called Vishvamitra; that river has been made sacred by various royal sages who have bathed in it. O conqueror of hostile cities! on its banks Yayati son of Nahusha fell down among righteous men from heaven for his impiety (in the past).
All men bear the burden of their preceptor. The brave man bears a heavy load in war; and the coward bears an unbearable one within his own self,
As the deep and unfathomable ocean, as that which is without beginning or end.
Our grandfather is old, intelligent and wise. He knows all the duties of religion; he has been always kind towards us, O son! What will be his future course?
You are incapable of being vanquished by the very gods led on by Indra himself, and you have attained such prowess. Therefore do I see that your power is true; O hero! And here stands Rāma like a mountain peak with his head in air.
Those Kshatriyas of great prowess, led by Bhagadatta and learned in the use of celestial weapons are heroes. They will destroy your enemies."
Yudhishthira said : O grandfather, what should be the behaviour of a maiden whose husband is not alive and who has received her dower?
Arjuna said O descendant of Bharata, the worst men are those who utter harsh and unkind words without being asked or ordered. They never remember any good deeds done by them; nor do they consider their own misdeeds. Such people only seek for themselves their own satisfaction when they act in this way.
From that blow of his, the armour on Arjuna's body was rent asunder and blood began to flow out. And a flame appeared like lightning in clouds from the force of that fist-stroke of his (Arjuna).
We do not see any fault in Rāghava. And like the spot on the moon, his fall is hard to compass; and if you find a blemish in him O goddess tell me what it may be so that I may inform Rāma of this."
Dhritarashtra said How did Yuyudhana resist Bharadvaja in battle? O Sanjaya, describe all this fully. My curiosity is very great on the subject.
That best of men, (Rāma) going on with his monkey host, heard all round the sounds made by dreadful birds. And also various animals went round him in a circle.
Having obtained this kingdom which is difficult of attainment, men do not seek for happiness. O Shakra I am alone in the world; and there are none whom I can depend on or who could accept presents from me."
The high-souled and heroic Karna, with his bow in hand and covered over with the shafts shot by Drona's son, stood still like a firebrand.
That Kshatriya who knows how to remove the defects of his family, as one does those of a piece of cloth, is regarded by men as his father and their lord.
Then that best of men, Kritavarma having duly adored Bhava as his lord and master resolved upon slaying Arjuna. He then sent word to the two heroes, viz., Duryodhana and Jayadratha saying
The celestials said : If you have faith, then do what we say. Do not delay long; for it is our pleasure that you should be saved at the command of Indra the lord among the gods."
The man of controlled senses, who has purified his mind and whose sins are all destroyed, does not desire anything here or in the next world; he is free from anger and delusion; he neither engages himself with any quarrel nor takes part in it. He acts like one without a body.
Indra said O Brahmana, if you have met with this powerful man in the empty house of Brahma tell me whether I should kill him or not.
The Panchalas, the Pandavas and all those that followed Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira) applauded these words of Bhimasena.
Bharadvaja said: I think that we have reached the spot which Yama told us of. Not far off, as it seems from here is Mandakini river.
Ordaining the means by which creatures should be created, and fixing them in their respective places, he established Yama as a great controller of all living beings. By Nature itself, then, many things are found existing together in pairs.
This is my great doubt, O king. Whether this Nala be really a prince or not? How can I know whether he has been well pleased with me in his mind and heart?"
All creatures lived happily, depending on the king of virtue. His deeds were marked with piety and they resembled their own bodies in every respect.
Thus addressed by Bharadvāja, the descendant of Ikşvāku spoke again with his eyes bathed in tears and under the influence of grief.
Then the mighty armed Bhimasena, O best of Bharata race, thus spoke in anger and as if reproaching Arjuna.
He, who has no relatives whom he can call his own and whose kinsmen are all wicked men, may live happily in this world like a single tree amidst many others.
That great ascetic performed the thirteen Kauśalya ceremonies (in honour of his son). He also celebrated various other rites after the birth of Bharata.
When the sun had disappeared in his car, he rose again from behind a mountain. The Lord of thousand eyes began then to rain at an improper season.
Shaunaka said : O son of Suta, I wish to hear the names of all those snakes that came there at the snake-sacrifice.
The king, the son of Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), having saluted his brothers with joined hands thus spoke in sweet accents.
O best of the Bharata race, that seed of hers was developed in her womb like a star on the sky.
And that Raksasa being thus afflicted exceedingly, the powerful and enhancer of Sumitra's joy was greatly enraged.
O king, we shall be much happier in living under Rāma who has been brought up by his father and grandfathers than in being at our own homes.
Having received the sixteen thousand horses and two thousand chariots of gold, the Kaikeyas gave them away as a present (to Bharata).
In this manner, hostilities began between Rāma and the inhabitants of earth. And at last that immeasurably energetic one conquered all the world.
O king, at the proper time a son was born with eyes resembling lotuses and of divine origin.
Lomasha said : O king, there is no occasion for you to have any sorrow. The men who are fond of virtue should not increase by adopting sinful means.
And that wretch of a Mleccha, the vicious Purochana has been burnt there. The wicked sons of Dhritarashtra along with their followers have also been cheated.
The Kshatriya who protects his kingdom and all creatures within it, who is ever ready for fight with enemies as well as for protecting friends and relatives, and who treats even the most ungrateful of women respectfully (is sure to acquire) virtue fame and prosperity.
Galava said Let that man who takes away your Pushkara, which you have given as a gift, be considered as an unworthy and vicious person.
Having thrown off his excellent bow, that foremost of the Shini race (Krishna) took up another, furnished with arrows.
And the roads of Ayodhyā were crowded with crowds of people, who had assembled there out of curiosity.
Possessed by the Raksasa, those heroes of the Samsaptaka army, blinded with darkness and ignorance and desirous of killing Phalguna.
I am alive still, O Suta's son. Where shall you go? Today I will remove from the field of battle your desire for fighting."
Like bulls whose horns are broken, and snakes of whom the fangs have been crushed.
Thus accosted by Rama, the highly effulgent Vibhisana told him everything.
Who is propitiated by the foremost of men, who perform in battle deeds that are not human and which even gods find impossible.
This Arjuna, who is like a mass of dark blue clouds in the midst of men and animals, is lying down on earth as an ordinary person. What can be more painful than this?
This wish of mine which I have cherished for a long time, shall be fulfilled. Either Dhananjaya will slay me in battle or Arjuna (will kill him).
And performing such deeds of merit as are the outcome of right resolutions, and abstention from sense objects; of vows and observances which have been prescribed by their preceptors; of food that has been offered in sacrifice, and study and learning; of works performed with self-control, of renunciation, and of restraint over one's own mind. Persons who wish for liberation thus perform these acts, and freed (from attachment) obtain riches or become deities.
He is my disciple, he is also a friend of mine and I am equally dear to him. Yuyudhana will make the Kaurava warriors tremble with his arrows."
In which the ten thousand thousands of kine were taken, how could you be distressed for one thousand?
Then approaching king Dhritarashtra, the illustrious son of Vrishni's race (Duryodhana) worshipped Bhishma with many sweet words.
Having received that excellent army, the delighted Sakra said these words of benediction in return.
Hearing the roaring of clouds, that mighty elephant began to turn back from his course and return like one who is going towards a battle.
I am not yet free from rage, though he has cut off the heads of his own kinsmen and other warriors in battle.
The foremost of car-warriors, accompanied by their foot-soldiers and the animals that carry them, all well-equipped for battle, rushed against Bhimasena.
O fool, you are my sport and have come within the range of my sight. I will take you today by means of sharp arrows into the abode of Yama (death).
O hero, I have enjoyed all pleasures and good things in this world. All the gods, sages, Pitris and Brahmanas are indebted me for that but not myself.
The king then asked them, "What is the cause of this fear?" and they were thus addressed by him.
Indra said : O Danava, you have come from the vilest of all forms. You eat excreta; and yet are not ashamed!
There was no man there who had not his menses. And none appeared with a dirty person, or whose hair were dishevelled through dust and dirt; nor did any one appear in rags.
At that time, Lakşmaņa- the son of Sumitrā and the conqueror of hostile cities, waxing worth on beholding his father's foe engaged in battle with Bharata; began fighting.
You are the foremost of all Brahmanas. You have studied the Vedas, and you are dearer than Brahma himself; (you) do what is for your good, as also what brings prosperity on others; you know everything about the Vedas;
I regard them as endowed with wealth of character, who have these two foremost of ascetics for their kinsmen. That they should be able to order things themselves is a proof that the connection between us (by marriage) is quite proper.
Those who were seen by those persons in that form, they saw themselves with their own weapons.
Surrounded by his disciples, learned in the arts of policy and acquainted with their meaning, Vyasa started for Kurukshetra, desirous of bringing about good fortune (to the Pandavas).
You are a foremost of kings and you should not renounce your son. O king, it behoves the truthful one like yourself to rule over this earth; therefore do not bear such an insult here.
Markandeya said He who is pure in his speech, acts and water (bath), has certainly acquired the three kinds of purity.
Rulers wish for an increase of their wealth, and a king is the protector of all.
Today the Kurus are seeing Karna and Arjuna engaged in conflict. Beholding their friendship, those men of little spirit bow down before them (in respect).
I shall go before you; and, having eaten with you, will enjoy myself. I desire after this (to see) mountains, woods, groves and lakes."
In that great battle, the Rakshasas were defeated by various kinds of men. The heroes with their chariots and horses and other animals (in their vehicles)
Having been pierced by the Satvata with showers of arrows, your son appeared like a pole made up of eight hundred kumbhas.
That foremost of men, the son of Kunti (Yudhishthira), then began to recite those mantras which are known as the means by his virtuous. He entered that blazing sacrificial fire with humility and respect.
We shall bring about your good by means of meditation, of Japa and of charming stories.
Saying this, she gave him her own celestial robe.
O son, your serving the Yadus out of folly is not at all proper; nor was it fit for you to serve them.
The celestial Rishi said : O auspicious lady, I am curious about you who are the creator of all that exists. You have created knowledge which is present in every creature and by virtue of it they can attain heaven.
What brave men there were who opposed Bhimasena, coming thus for battle with Drona and having done a great deed against the enemy? He was of mighty strength. His body was huge; his energy was prodigious; he resembled an army consisting of ten thousand elephants in prowess.
The son of Suta said : Having thus made an agreement that they would meet the next day, (they) returned home.
Beholding Sumitrā's son deprived of his senses, Rāma could not refrain from lamenting.
Having said these words, Vibhisana distressed with grief replied in a way that was good for his brother.
Having slain the ruler of Sindhu, Vishnu will come for you. Free from all your anxieties and afflictions, O king, do you now seek your kingdom."
O king of kings, you have also acquired great prosperity. Like the descendants of Ikshvaku with their sons and friends, like Mucukunda or Mandhata or Marutta who became celebrated for piety through ascetic austerities; as all the celestials in consequence of their penances so shall you acquire merit by your acts. The sons of Dhritarashtra are under illusion; they will be soon conquered just as Daityas were defeated (by Indra).
The Brahmana said : All of you have tried your best here. We are equal in that respect; let us therefore go where our destination lies!
Yudhishthira said : This king, who was supported by a thousand elephants and hundred thousands of men, lies here in the dust.
That one of restrained vows who sees the course of all creatures, beginning with Time and ending in Death himself, knows that every duty is different from another.
Then taking up the bow, Samvarta joyfully fought with Shalya's counsellor Kshemavridha and his charioteer Chamochar.
Some of the very wise among them will keep their promises. O son, you know my intentions towards Brahmanas; do what I say and let peace be brought about between yourself and your subjects.'
What is there for you now, except Angada and Divvīda and Maindă and Jambavan and Panasa and Nala and the lord of monkeys—Nila? And O descendant of Raghu, having got over that city belonging to Rāvana, what will they do with me after going round it furnished with many mountains forests, high walls and gates; and palaces and mansions in all directions.
And, having passed by all the Kākṣyas of Daśaratha's race and returned (to his palace), Råma entered alone into that pure inner apartment.
And (at last) Rāma, undeteriorating and of inconceivable prowess went over the Pampa river fair and delightful with trees resembling rafts.
The king also gave away the food and drink which he took himself, together with all other articles of enjoyment.
A person, who is conversant with the object of Vedas and their application in life, does not fear them as fire fears wood.
Kripa, Bhoja and your son (Shalya) also struck him with their sharp arrows. Thus the invincible Arjuna fought against those four kings like Indra fighting against the Daityas led by Bali in days of yore."
Neither the best of cars, nor Drona's son and Kritavarman could succeed in slaying Satyaki.
Endued with effulgence, ancient and eternal, he traverses the worlds that are infinite and without any fear. He never forsakes or is afraid of living creatures.
This mighty-armed one, who is the foremost of all beings and incapable of being slain by us alone. He should be adored not only by ourselves but also by these three worlds.
As a person is seen by the fire as it burns in his own house, so does this form of yours appear before us.
Others, however, who were wise and had also conquered the Rakshasa in battle through their wisdom said to him with pride.
For the gratification of Draupadi, he stayed in Virata's city incognito with his only refuge being Bahuka. But by adopting an invisible form Kichaka and all those men were killed.
Yudhishthira said Tell me, O grandfather, how that king of kings wandered through the earth with a shorn head and in utter destitution after he had been afflicted by Time wielding his rod.
Seeing him thus placed before the army, Drona's son (Ashvatthaman), his face covered with shame and bending low in respect towards that perpetuator of Kuru race said
Bhishma said Regarding it is cited the ancient history of what was told by a Bhrigu, who had come there for asking Bharadvaja about his learning.
Being angry, he spoke thus to the mountain as a lion speaks to a small deer. O Parvata, show me Maithili of golden complexion and fair limbs; I will not destroy your all trees so long you do not exhibit her before me.” Having been addressed in this way by Rāma about Mithil's daughter, that hill showed Sītă before him but did not show her to Raghu's descendant (Rama).
Indra said : A Brahmana, who having studied the Vedas with the Atharvans (rituals) and followed the practices of Chhandogya school for his Brahmacharya discipline performs a sacrifice in honour of Soma and takes part in it should take from there one Kusha grass.
The friends of Yayati said, “This is the best sacrifice among all sacrifices. Nahusha and Mandhata as also Bharatha have acquired by it heaven."
The conch of Vasudeva then filled the air with its loud blares, while those heroes who were engaged in protecting Sindhu's kingdom.
Then the king of men, with his followers came in due order to Ganga and made arrangements for their residence as he liked.
And I send them, those wicked enemies of mine and the vilest men in this world, into all kinds of calamity as they are born among Asuras.
O Krishna, I bow down my head with great reverence. You are the soul of all creatures and you give birth to them; you have destroyed that Asura who was bent on destroying your devotees! O Vishnu, you create this universe and therefore you are called Vishvamatra (the creator) of everything in it. O mighty-armed hero, O Vasudeva, O Lord of the world, O Slayer of Madhu, O Supreme Being, 0 protector of those who seek refuge with you, O Gopala, o lord of men, O primeval being, O preserver of beings, O destroyer of enemies, O eternal one, O bestower of boons, O remover of distress, O Saviour from calamities, O refuge of persons who take shelter under you, O Creator of minds and forms of things, O giver of boons, I am thy humble servant.
The time that is past, even for a moment, has passed away and no longer exists. What then can be the use of thinking about it when our body itself changes every instant?
Thus having deliberated in his mind, he believed the words of Vaidehi and was encouraged by her excellent speech. And with an assurance from Balaka as well as by those good counsels (of hers), that one set out for Mithila full of curiosity.
That which should have been given as Yautaka (dowry) by the father of a daughter, shall be taken away from his son-in-law; and that wealth which is the share of a brother's sons, may also be taken away.
Having approached Drona who was stationed at the head of his array and having saluted him, he said these words with Krishna's permission.
O illustrious one, through your grace we have acquired the sovereignty of this Earth. And having achieved victory and fame in all three worlds we shall not be deprived of virtue.”
He, who does not respect himself and therefore acquires (unwillingly) what is otherwise desired by him; whose welfare the gods cannot bring about as he has no self-control or power of his own; that husband should say to me “I have come myself”, without insulting me, a chaste woman. You do not worship those women whom you see in your house as servants but insulted this wife when she came herself before you.
Then those two chastisers of foes, displaying their prowess in the field and showing all kinds of feats; struck one another with maces. They met together like elephants striking each other with their tusks and became bathed in blood.
Behold, the fall of that rod which was never understood and which had been bent in wrath.
By controlling his senses, a person may always renounce lust and anger and fear and covetousness and malice and falsehood.
They, who were not aware of the wickedness of Kshatriyas and who did not know their deceitfulness, deceived king Yudhishthira.
This is the way in which a Shraddha should be performed. The time for it also has been described by me according to proper rites and observances, as well as its fruits.
The soul, which is the abode of all virtues and qualities like power and strength, cannot be satisfied with any worldly objects. By practising Brahmacharya in conjunction with knowledge of Brahman one can acquire all his desires.
That king, always filled with anger and a great car-warrior well-skilled in the use of weapons was repeatedly moving hither and thither. Then he wounded that son of Pandu who stood before him and then being greatly agitated touched water.
As the Nakula advanced, burning all before him with his fiery car and causing great pain in the hearts of your troops who were yet unable to receive that onset (of Arjuna), what brave warriors did then resist Drona?
Dushyanta, Suratha, Gadhira and the king Pururavas all said to him,-"O descendant of Kuru, we have been defeated." Thereupon Ravana having reached Ayodhya with his troops as inaccessible as Amaravati guarded by Indra himself. And coming before that foremost of men resembling Purandara in strength he thus spoke-"Fighting do you give up your life!"-or-'Say I am conquered.' Let this be my order.”
Vayuputra, (Arjuna) became very much delighted and began to lick the corners of his mouth. Thereupon O mighty monarch, Karna, having stopped him with many sharp arrows said
Having offered all the wealth in sacrifice, Rāma of Daśaratha's line has gone hence, who shall have eternal regions and whose fame is great.
Thus did the wicked-minded son of Dhritarashtra entertain firm hopes in his heart.
They said this and lamented aloud; but they became still more afflicted with grief. And overwhelmed by sorrow, again and again began to weep piteously.
You know me for a competent protector of Raksas from danger; but you have been led away by anger, and therefore left Maithili.
At the conclusion of that discourse, king Hotravahan asked Rama-the best among all great ascetics-about his wounds.
Having saluted them and inquired after their health, that intelligent youth with a delighted heart bowed down his head before his father and mother.
On the standard, on the flag-staffs and chariots, vehicles and horses as also in other parts of the car.
You shall be the foremost and most beloved wife of Keshava among his sixteen thousand wives.
The son of the sun, having a face resembling that of Balārk and himself looking like him in form, desirous of catching hold of the Sun's charioteer, is leaping through space.
That is the abode of immortality, and that is Brahman; it is also Fame. The creatures originated from this (Brahma), and they return into it at death.
Then the Sindhus, with their faces towards the east and having all those countries on their right hand side which lay opposite them on that bank of the river, withdrew from view.
The ministers said : O king, hear what your high-souled father has done. That foremost of kings is now dead and soiled with dust.
The birds and animals are increasing in number, as also the swans. All these eat flesh of kine.
Bhishma said O king, when the messenger of Drupada thus spoke to him, he did not move an inch as if he was a thief who had been caught red-handed.
And the highly exalted and heroic Bharata, together with his brothers arrived at that cave. The elder brother Guha consoled Rāma in those difficult times.* *By staying there till the time of Rama's return from exile.
The city of Pushkara blazed with the splendour of many a year. All its streets were adorned with garlands and golden arches.
O king, the monarch had his right arm broken by the foe. His head was shaved and he wore a garb of bark with matted locks on his person.
With broad-headed arrows he cut-off the heads and arms of men armed with weapons; and again, as if they were elephants' trunks, severed their thighs by means of sharp shafts.
O king, in that sacrifice the highly blessed and white-hued son of Aditi Varuna.
Hearing those words of Saudasa, the large-eyed Uttanka said these words to Janamejaya gifted with great intelligence.
The Rishis, the foremost of men and celestials led by Narayana himself have said that this is a great remedy for grief.
I think that the sons of Pandu must be extremely sorry, having seen those two heroes who had defeated Drona in battle.
Seeing that part of the sky, covered with mountains and clouds as if in sleep or at play, or being looked over by those best among Danavas who lived in Patala, the elephants were filled with hairs standing on their bodies.
Bhishma said Having thus promised, O lord and adored the duties of virtue, you should adore also Yama (Death) as well as Time which is Death itself.
I shall tell you of the Kshatriya duties, which are eternal and everlasting in this world as they have been so for Shantanu.
Bhishma said Listen, O king, as I recite the song that is chanted by the Self-create himself. Having done what it prescribes one obtains peace of mind and has no doubt on his mind.
One who is not satisfied by prosperity and becomes more wretched in adversity, it thought as a sign of great friendship.
When the proper season shall have come, those whose objects are attained and who know their fathers' histories will perform all the rites for Rāghava.
Yudhishthira said : O sire, how can you tell us such a story when the Kauravas have been killed and we are all now safe?
The Understanding is called Mind; and the moon, being dependent upon it, has been said to be its deity. It (the mind) again depends on Reason for producing all sorts of effects in Nature.
Then that foremost of monkeys, Sushena, inflamed with rage and taking up a huge rock rushed towards the night-ranger.
The daughter of the ruler of Kosala, while moving about on earth, no longer shines forth with her beauty like a star that has fallen down from heaven.
Then when that army was thus slaughtered, together with its foot-soldiers and elephants and horses and cars. (The field) appeared like a vast expanse of sky suddenly enveloped in clouds; it resounded with the clatter made by those weapons which were wielded about there,
Those foremost of the Kshatriyas, placing Vasudeva at their head and surrounding Yudhishthira, sat down. And saluting that chief among Kurus, Kesava spoke with a sad heart.
The councillors sat down with him. They rose up from their seats and began to adore the priest (for his good deeds).
The three Rishis spent that night in the king's palace, being greatly honoured and delighted; they were endued with all virtues.
The two were highly delighted and they both praised each other. They looked like a couple of horses or elephants in rut.
Another person is indestructible, and he has the attribute of being eternal. The following simile may be given about him as also regarding what is called time:-Just like a thread made out of flax.
When his life was about to come to an end, he attained the desired state. He then assumed a form of a cow and became polluted by his former acts.
Before I have been adored by you and now honoured; but when I shall be brought before others, then it will not become me to live with you.
By killing today Arjuna with Govinda and the proud Vrikodara, as also all his followers I shall discharge my debt towards Karna. Hearing those words of the king of the Kurus which were worthy of a hero and an excellent wife (Draupadi), Suta ordered Ashvatthama to drive forward their horses decked in gold.
The powerful Rāvana, with that shaft shot from a complete bow-string and having straight knots. struck the head of (Lava) who was engaged in doing good to others.* *Or 'the best among the Rakşasas.'
O son, this bed is prepared for you. Be comforted with the auspicious girl as if in your own house.
Thereupon the lightning-decked Indra said, “O you of a hundred sacrifices, behold this more subtle form of righteousness.
O gentle Rāma, that which is unspeakable and unmanifest like the Brahmă; it is the heart of the celestials. It should be kept secret by you as well as me, O destroyer of enemies!
Then from that earth born herbs grew the king of all medicinal plants and he created day-light with its energy.
While the poor, blind and wretched were thus being given food continually from that mountain of wealth (the treasury), there arose a great calamity.
Dhritarashtra said Who checked Ajatasaturu (Arjuna) who came like the rising sun, dispelling darkness with his energy and who was going in great wrath? That best of men appeared as a lion raging at being wounded. Beholding him with an cheerful countenance he began to kill those heroes that were rushing towards Vasudeva's son when they had come within reach of the latter,
Sharangishto said : O Ahura, who is there in your house of Soma or Indra's or Vishnu's or Yama's or Varuna's that has a right to look at women? You are well aware, o king, of my beauty and birth and conduct. I ask you therefore to be pleased with me; do you grant me permission (to marry).
Ashtaka said : That king is very foolish who, being addicted to lustful indulgence and engaged in wicked deeds, has lost your Pushkara.
Vaishampayana said : Having ascertained the desire of Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira thus replied to him saying "This cannot be done by me".
But Nala was unable to hide his heart. And he, desiring concealment of himself from the inmates within, began to live in that forest like a deer at large.
Beholding the terrible looking Rākşasas flee away, Khara's car went on after them.
Hearing these words of the physician, Kunti's son Yudhishthira said with a cheerful heart and smilingly to the king of Madra.
And having heard of the merits and benefits of gifts, his doubts were removed; now do you relate what that other Brahmana did.
Then king Dasaratha, entering the inner apartment (of his palace) addressed a charioteer saying "Bring back Rāma."
I shall now relate a story which is true, O sinless one! For the purpose of explanation only and not for any malice. You should pardon me after hearing it."
I am living here with this mild one, O son of Sumitrā. If Vaidehī be served by the excellent breeze blowing over Pampă's wood fragrant with lotuses and sandalwood, and dispelling griefs and woes, then is she fortunate who serves in that forest inhabited by wind-gods!
Then arriving at the Agnitirtha, they saw Vvalana according to his proper form.
As a lamp burning in the wind still burns, so are you, O lord of gods! You have not been extinguished by me; but remain like an immovable stone.
One should always take his time in action; one should make proper arrangements for it. In acting, one should do nothing without a sufficient reason or cause.
And he (Indrajit) then made the mighty car-warriors of his host tremble by assuming various shapes. Then there issued from all directions lions and tigers, bears and wolves; and serpents having fiery tongues, birds with faces like those of cats, as also many other kinds of creatures having wings and mouths resembling that of a cat.
That man who disregarding the precepts of the scriptures follows his own wishes, never attains success; he has no happiness and fails in acquiring a high end.
He is summoning in the midst of his brothers, Susharma. It behoves you also to give me permission for killing him and all his followers.
And that wondrously powerful Kumbhakarna, having reached the lord of monkeys in battle, took hold of Sugriva and carried him away like a tempest carrying off a cloud.
The whole field of battle was thrown into disorder; nothing could be perceived. In consequence of the dust raised by the troops, everything became invisible.
O Vrikodara, that place cannot be reached by men who are mean or covetous and uncontrolled.
Those who subsist on fruits and roots, acquire royal prosperity. And those that live upon leaves go up to heaven.
One who is intelligent and contented obtains without any trouble the fruits of his actions. Therefore, O king, seeing this fruit which you have obtained in the form of a son endued with accomplishments that are agreeable to yourself, do you exert for its maintenance.
O Vrikodara, when the kinsmen are at variance and there is a war between them then do not lose your family virtues.
Then, O king, your troops and those of the Pandavas having achieved victory in that great battle began to slaughter one another all over the field.
And Rama also, worked up with rage in that battle severed the heads of those four monkeys by means of his dreadful arrows resembling flames.
Even the Himavat itself, as also the sky and earth cannot bear this impetuosity of my arrows shot from my arms.
Those, O lord of the universe who live in land and those that are aquatic creatures all together came there. And having brought them (all) kings could not see you.
As if desirous of inspiring the trees with delight, he set them ringing by his sweet notes; and then as if having escaped from a mountain cave or as if blown away by the wind.
Then Susarma, the king of Prasthalas and that foremost of men Trigarta accompanied by a thousand cars. And with Madrakas, Malavas, Tunjikeras and Surashtras, Shusharman came there on one hundred car.
The king of the Shinis, that foremost of men then covered with his arrows which were shot from a string drawn back up to ear and which resembled venomous snakes in their energy.
O king, those best of men were defeated by Partha and they all fell down dead on the field.
At his shout, the Saindhavas became filled with fear and ran away. And those afflicted by sorrow began to shed tears; (and) they were also washed in their own blood.
Thus ordered, the car of Khara's slayer, with great speed and making a loud sound filled all sides.
Thereupon the Pandavas, having performed their Svastiyana rites with Dhaumya and surrounded by many Brahmanas went towards Kamyaka forest.
Then riding on his car which looked like a constellation of thousands of stars, Sakra rushed upon the monkeys.
They praised that excellent horse, of incomparable beauty which was born in the nectar and milk churned out by them.
The king of the celestials said, O lord, I shall observe this vow at your command. My time has been spent in beholding you and therefore have come here for observing a forest life. This is what we had agreed upon with each other."
And restraining his tears, and shedding them from his eyes; the highly energetic one again addressed Rāma.
I shall now describe the fourth and last of all these, which is called Parama Ashrama (the highest retreat). Listen as I tell you.
And the others, deprived of their senses and being killed every moment came out from their tents in fear.
They were all obedient and faithful servants of the high-souled Bharata, for he was their lord. All those places where they lived (at pleasure) were very beautiful and abounded in fruits and flowers;
Alas, the destruction of kinsmen has been brought about. We are now in danger and our friends have perished!
A man, overwhelmed by lust and passion, is seized with desire. And from this there arises greed; for it has been said that covetousness causes sorrow and sin and leads one to vice.
I will, without doubt kill Suyodhana in battle; victory is certain for Dharma's son.
I behold a dark blue mass of clouds with lightning flashing in it. And the chaste Vaidehi appears like that very flash of lightening, while she is reposing on Ravana's lap.
O Krishna, I am the daughter of Dharma and therefore also half sister to Bhishma. By fair means or by force I have been made a slave.
Having satisfied the Brahmanas, given each one his share of gold and cows according to their respective wishes, having exchanged words with one another about what they had done for whom and when, and then going back home after lighting up a fire on Krishna's van (and performing Vedic rites), those steadfast warriors made firm resolutions in that sacrificial fire.
I shall construct a palace of one pillar, having nine doors and without any roof. What person will say that he has not seen this building before?
And he saw that high-souled one burning like a fire, wearing garments of soft deer skin and accompanied by the eternal ascetics. Then bowing down with folded hands before Rāma who was engaged in thinking upon virtue, (he), with his senses restrained said these words worthy of being spoken to the virtuous-minded hero.
Keshini said : Who is this third person and whose? Why are you engaged in his work.
O best of men, learning that you have sent for me I am come here. But the high-souled Rāghava has already vanquished and killed in battle the irrepressible lord of Rakşasas-Ravana; and therefore he is not now within his city.
I shall now speak of that auspicious, and subtle principle which governs all creatures. It controls both the gentle and terrible principles in them.
How has that hero, who was proud of his prowess and strength among the gods as well as the Daityas and whose might resembled those of fire or Death himself been killed by Rāghava in battle?
There were one thousand men of tranquil soul who had studied the Vedas and observed vows, and also a thousand disciples that had been purified by Abhichara bathes.
Then, O king, the dreadful shaft fell upon my breast like a snake uttering his hiss. I then went away covered with blood all over my body.
There is a mountain called Vaidurya-shikara, sacred and auspicious. It abounds in trees that are always covered with green leaves and flowers and fruits.
The serpents then vomited forth copious streams of water with their heads from rage and fear for the fire.
That mighty monkey, Hanumān, beheld Lankā like the sun's disc enveloped in a cloud and having flames of fire for its rays.
Formerly, in the course of his sacrifice at Dakshas's house and filled with anger he had burst open the gates of heaven. The highly powerful Indra, taking up a bow for destroying those gods who were about to divide among themselves my portions of food, said-You celestials have not given me any portion as is due to myself! I shall now kill you all by means of this excellent weapon (bow).
The self-create gave him the boon of being invulnerable by Asuras and celestials. These are his celestial armour, car and steeds as effulgent as fire.
Those who went towards him, all fled away from his presence like the Sindhu people flying when they see a wave of water coming on them.
O great king, those brave Kuru warriors are all awake and guarding me; but they have come here with a view of meeting you.
Janamejaya said : O holy one, how did Arstisena acquire such great ascetic merit? How also was he able to get a piece of land in the island of Sindhu as his share (of the wealth) acquired by the Brahmanas.
Savitra gave away his excellent ear-rings and his chariot. Janamejaya also conferred kine upon a Brahmana, and went then to the best of regions.
In the hermitage of Vasiştha, eighty nine and eight Brahmanas were killed by those wicked ones.
The destruction of his (the Rakshasa's) illusion showed the second deed of Vishnu.
O mighty monarch, the warriors (of both sides) meeting each other began to move about in that battle killing one another.
Although I have heard from the king himself (Rāma) in secret, yet will I recite it. Destiny is irresistible; by virtue of this we are visited with such grief and sorrow; nor can you or Bharata or Satrughna support each other in these calamitous circumstances.
I think that if any one hears this discussion between us, he will be benefited by the knowledge which it conveys.
Thereupon, the prince's father finding him (the ascetic) acquainted with his conduct and receiving him honourably dismissed him; and that best of kings embraced him affectionately again and again.
And the king (Rāma) was desirous of beholding that city of Ayodhyā, which is like a host of people and increases their delight.
Having heard these auspicious words of his friends, that foremost among the Bharata race, entered in joy with them into his own palace.
He is always engaged in the protection of all creatures, and never seeks for any profit. In consequence he has no attachment whatever.
When things were thus, the Somakas and Pandavas became exceedingly depressed in spirit.
Through the favour of Vyasa, I have heard from Krishna himself in person and conversant with Yoga as he is, what was shrouded in mystery.
Rāma, your father is propitiated with you; and therefore shall you obtain the kingdom. Let us today keep fasts along with Sītă.
Having known the prowess of those self-controlled ones, Divodasa, gifted with great energy and without any desire for sovereignty, began to rule over Varanasi under Sakra's orders.
The scents of nine sorts should be mixed with the body. Fire perceives by means of its eye and touch is perceived by wind.
As those who are endued with virtue, when they meet aged men and persons of high piety, respectfully salute them according to the established rule, so one should do by his friends. The fool lives happily while he is ignorant of faults but falls into misery as soon as he points out others' defects. Those that are virtuous should speak in such a way that their words may not offend their hearers.
That speech, which is free from hesitation and fear of failure; which has no delay or anxiety attached to it; which is delivered with the help of a voice that is neither loud nor soft but at an intermediate pitch.
The noble minded lady did not listen (to the words of Valmiki). Then, seeing that Sukanya was deaf and blind on account of her love for Bhrigu's son.
That best of men, passing by three divisions protected with bows and swords and elephants, entered into another division consisting only of foot-soldiers.
Janamejaya said How did that king Yudhishthira, the descendant of Kuru and also the best among them all, worship for the sake of a Brahmana that wonderful Sun which is so highly effulgent?
When Kaikeyi, with downcast eyes and shamefacedness had said those harsh words, king Dasaratha addressed the princess of large eyes saying.
The greatly effulgent Vishnu then took away the life of that Asura with his hand. And he fell down on earth like a mountain hurled by some one (in battle).
Wise men and learned physicians, who have knowledge of the soul (Atman) as well as worldly enjoyments, should be employed by kings. They may dispense with them if they do not like their advice.
You are not the eldest Pandava; I am neither unrighteous nor O Arjuna, sinful. The wicked wretch who was a traitor to his preceptor has been slain by you therefore fight for victory."
Then smiling a little and censuring the son of Pandu he said, "How can you be born in an illustrious family; how are you so well trained for your duty as a Kshatriya? How is it that being afraid of death in battle (you have been) incapable of bearing arms. I think you must not know what ought to done by a Kshatriya."
And, O lord of kings, in this hunt you have gratified your heart and also enjoyed sexual pleasure. But the fruit of human exertion has been frustrated by you."
Having then placed the standard on a chariot, Karna began quickly to advance against those elephants. He then pierced them with his arrows and struck down their drivers; whereupon he uttered loud war-cries like an angry lion.
O sinless Rāma, you may possibly obtain the empire of the celestials with my help; what need I speak then of a kingdom on earth.
Dhananjaya made the hostile warriors, who had their faces turned towards him and were running away from battle with all haste, fall down on earth by striking them in their back.
Then the celestials and Apsaras began to utter loud shouts. And showers of flowers fell down from heaven, furnished with excellent stalks and calyxes and containing all kinds of fragrant odours.
In the end, they were punished by the gods with death. The god (Indra), after thus addressing them and adoring her for a moment,
I am again and again thinking of the destruction of that immeasurably puissant hero, as also of those Yadus and Krishna.
Tell me, O Brahmana what is the gift that one makes which never becomes exhausted. I am not able to make it; tell me also where such a gift can be made?
Kapila said The Vedas are the authority of all men and they have not been framed from any other source. There are two kinds of Brahma, viz., Sound-Brahma which is superior (to it),
The son of Jamadagni said : He who celebrates an Ashvamedha sacrifice, or a Vajapeya hundred in honour of his horses; or who completes any other sacrifices with the help of large gifts (to Brahmanas); and he also whose wealth diminishes as fast as it increases; and he too whom death overtakes before the completion of a sacrifice which is commenced by him. All these men must go straightway into hell because their hearts are impure.
Then the lord of Sachi, that god disappeared again. He then roamed in disguise all over the world for the fulfilment of his desire (of getting back Indra's kingdom).
Then Drona of firm vows and straight aim, piercing through the ranks (of his enemies) like an elephant in rut, assailed Dhrishtadyumna.
Therefore have we been freed from the fire and come under this tree for protection. In what direction shall we go? We are now visited with great distress.
In this very age, O sire, the learned Agastya and seven other Rishis viz., Madhuchchanda, Aghamarshana, Sankriti Sudiva, Tandiya Athavasa Akratashrama, Ahoviryas (Aho), Kavya, Medhatithir Budha Balavan Karnanivraka Shunyapala. Having performed their duties they all attained heaven.
I do not see the possibility of any destruction of monkeys in this battle, for those foremost among Raksasas have been slain by them.
While ranging near the Rishyamuka, he saw two highly beautiful and fleet-footed deer. And being afraid of them she stood as if motionless without moving even a step.
It is your duty not to act without due consideration in this matter, O you of the Vrishni race.
Having obtained this excellent and wonderful boon from the celestials, that best of Asuras built a magnificent palace.
Then that twice-born one, greatly enraged, alighted from his car and went by a circuitous way towards the south.
The son of Kunti (Yudhishthira) also caused many residences for the Brahmanas, in all parts of his kingdom and according to due rites.
What other is superior than Rāma, who is equal in every way with Sumitrā's son? Those brothers of yours are like the fire and wind.
O king, men and women will not be able to bear one another when the time of dissolution comes.
The learned men say that the death of a person who is bereft of his beautiful wife and is living with another woman, is very auspicious.
A bird was killed by a falcon with its wings cut. O great king, it fell down on the terrace of the car.
Then as the highly powerful and angry son of Pandu, endued with great prowess rushed at him in anger like Death himself.
O descendant of Bharata, I always see the two sunsets and risings being obstructed by Kabandhas.
That man who thus diminishes his own self, which is like a little fire burning in the ashes, gradually consumes even great hoards of wealth.
That god, who is the son of Dharma and was born in order that he may perform some task. He had been known before by the name of Narayana; he has since become celebrated as Vishnu.
What Duryodhana said about me, that is what has happened now. O charioteer! I have attained all those with you (the Pandavas).
Having approached the fierce quarter of the sky illumined by the sun, and beheld that mighty forest being ravaged by foes, these deer began to relate their sufferings in words similar to those used by men.
Then seeing Bhimasena of terrible prowess thus enraged, the powerful king of Kashi said with a smile.
All of you go towards the river Bhagirathi. You will see there all those who have been killed in battle."
The Shri-Vijaya power of the divine Krishna, Partha's bowmanship and my own intelligence are all concentrated in that place.
Indra, Yama, Vaisravana and Varuna the lord of waters are not equal (to me). What then can you be compared with my self O tree?
And hurling the iron mace with great force, and producing a sound resembling that of Vasava's thunderbolt; I have appeared before you all armed with twelve bows.
The Brahmanas please the Pitris, the celestials and all creatures. Therefore it is said that a Brahmana is equal to all living beings.
O best of the celestials, what have you obtained by renouncing this kingdom and going away from me? This is not my heaven; I desire only that in which your brothers live.
Urvasi, Purvachitti and Sahjanjaya, Menaka Vishwachi and Gritri these are the six best of Apsaras.
Thereupon having performed his evening ablutions and gone with the son of Sumitra, he entered that charming residence of Rāma possessed by Lakşmană.
Then the charioteer quickly took away Dhristadyumna from before that of Arjuna's car. Thereupon, those warriors and their followers uttered loud shouts in delight.
Even one man, that mighty-armed Vibhatsu (Arjuna), has entered the city of Bharata which is incapable even by all the celestials in battle.
It is for this that he regards me with such contempt, I beseech you. All these misdeeds of mine are like a burning fire kindled by myself.
That foremost of the Pandavas defeated him in a great battle and brought him under his subjection.
O best of the Bharata race, eight hundred chief sacrifices have been performed there for making it beautiful and not at all with an eye on a future result. The king of heaven along with his consort Sachi has gained salvation by these acts (of piety).
Karna, however, quickly mounted his chariot and O king beholding the prowess of that son of Suta.
The king, Dhritarashtra was praised by the best of Brahmanas with their joined palms and he also said these words in reply "I am indeed blessed that I have such sons who are capable of winning victory.
Bhimasena began, like a lion that had conquered fear through his own prowess and that was living in the mountains with which were inhabited by buffaloes and boars as also by lions. He passed over those beds of lotuses having golden leaves filled with flowers whose fragrance spread everywhere; those tracts full of trees which looked beautiful when they bent down on account of being fanned by the wind; (and) those regions abounding in delightful gardens and groves of Padma plants along the roads where he saw six elephants each walking with folded palms towards him for receiving food from their masters.
Do not kill the creatures that are born on earth. You have committed many sins; what is your retribution for all these? The celestials and saints,
Hearing this, the king set out with his foremost horses having speed equal to that of the wind. I am their charioteer also."
I do not desire, O foremost of men, life or earth like you; for my love and affection towards your majesty.
In days of yore, Richeka in order to get a wife for his son Gadhya had been looking out for a daughter-in-law.
He, who trusts a person thinking that his trust is not unrequited and that he will be rewarded for it as one would expect from the father should always cherish confidence in him. And by using all means of persuasion he should make such confidence grow on every side; and then he (the trusted friend) may know what the marks are of good friendship. The fear which men feel at being deprived of their wealth or life is much greater than even the fear of violating religious obligations or committing any other sin whatever. Those persons who desire another's loss are considered as enemies."
After a while, the highly illustrious Rishi Pulastya saw that best of ascetics who had taken his birth from him.
Having met Bhishma in battle, Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin as also Virata and Drupada pierced that great car-warrior with their arrows.
I am not now at my ease with bow in hand, O you destroyer of the Raksasa race. Do not act thus for a moment; and do you become cognizant (of your true position).
In this way, one should not feel affection for his sons and grandsons or kinsmen and friends; there is no doubt that separation from them will come.
O descendant of Bharata, Karna had received from Rama the permission (to wear) that pair of ear-rings which was worthy and suitable for him.
The king (Dasaratha) went back at once after the departure of Vishvamitra, without waiting for Vaideha's son, Mithilā's lord.
There, on the breast of Ambāra grew up an Agni having a rough aspect. He had flowers for his locks and lotuses were scattered around him like clouds; and smoke issued out from all sides of that mountain peak.
Those, who are always engaged in stealing from the bodies of other persons and those that utter harsh words against others, even if they be free from all faults, have been avoided by the gods with great care.
For the good of your sons, he began a battle with that Rakshasa. Then there commenced a terrible fight between Drona's son and the Rakshasa in their midst.
He then disregarded the Pandavas in battle, viz., Kripa and Somadatti, that foremost of car-warriors Drona; also the king of Sindhu and Karna.
O destroyer of Madhu, in you all our pleasures and sorrows have their existence. You are the refuge of every one who has a desire for happiness; therefore your journey is attended with great pleasure on account of this.
Through ignorance of the distinctions, a son takes his father for his friend and considers one who is not really such as his own. Similarly through folly he may consider a man as being like a brother when in reality he is no more so than any other person.
Beholding the Kuru prince seated in that state of unconsciousness, Arjuna, the slayer of hostile heroes, experienced a great agitation.
I am competent by virtue of my asceticism, and the construction of bridges over rivers, as well as for drawing water from seas, to cross this ocean.
Dhananjaya, by means of his arrows made the Mlecchas with their hair shaved off and half-shaved heads look as if they were covered in a cloud. And he slew them all who came there together at that time through the power of weapons (that lay concealed within him).
Krishna said You all know that Yudhishthira was defeated by the son of Subala, in a game at dice and deprived of his kingdom. He also made an agreement with him for going into exile (into forest).
Then the monkeys speedily lifting up huge trees and gigantic crags, rushed towards Kumbhakarna.
The Asuras, with the Rakshasas, all united together, advanced in a body. Then there ensued an awful conflict between those two hosts of heroes, capable of bewildering the three worlds (of men).
And the cries of men and Rakshasas, sounding awful and dreadful (at that time), were heard.
As a river flows from the mountain, so does virtue flow from wealth.
The wise men consider all the modes of life as equal. Three are considered as one; and three, O king, constitute a single mode of life called that of householders.
Say the same thing also to Vidura, who is always ready with advice for the Kurus. Be pacific in your speeches and speak so as to bring about peace between Yudhishthira and Duryodhana."
At this moment, the mighty car-warrior Achyuta (Arjuna) struck Pandu's son with his sharp lance.
Then, having resolved upon the churning of the ocean and made Vasuki as a cord for that purpose (the great snake being chosen by Indra), they churned it with immeasurable might.
Having committed this great and censurable sin, how could you not be ashamed of speaking in the presence of that assembly which is so beautiful?
As the infuriate Nala, with his bow-string cut off and his arrows exhausted by excessive use of them could not subdue Naraka in battle so also can Partha without destroying your army.
Virtue, action and Destiny. These three exist separately from one another; but men never consider them as separate things.
How can the noble say anything low or mean? O Sītā, he who says 'Save me,' shall be saved even by the celestials.
And remembering his long-standing enmity, the powerful Bhima is always angry and desirous of victory.
Hearing my words, Rāghava shall soon come here with a mighty army composed of monkeys and bears.
As a man sees his own limbs in dream and as he also see other people's bodies, so the embodied soul is said to acquire or lose different forms.
Vaishampayana said : Having heard the whole story, the Pandavas and Janamejaya soon proceeded on their way following the path pointed out by Lomasha.
The way which leads from the world of men into that of celestials is known as Pitrivan. That, on the other hand, by which persons go in their next births through hell and so forth, for acquiring merit or sinning, is called Devayana,
What, indeed, can be the use of such a person as is sinful and ungrateful, has his memory divided into two parts and who is fickle in purpose? He does not deserve any confidence at all.
Having heard these words of Huta, the illustrious and godlike giver of all worlds addressed him smilingly in this wise. For twelve years you have been engaged with me as a sacrificer, O highly blessed one! It is for that reason that grief has overtaken you today. Without having obtained any energy from my fire, suddenly, 0 carrier of sacrificial libations, deprived of your divine power, thou hast become like an ordinary man and art therefore going away from here. I shall remove thy sense of disgust if only you observe your promise.'
Having said this, O Bharata, the king rushed upon Drona for Yuyudhana's sake.
Then with anger rising up in his heart, Khara ascended the chariot drawn by horses and having its body made of gold. The yoke was studded with pearls; it had a golden rim round which were fastened chains (of bells); thereon were placed two large vessels containing perfumes and flowers, decked out with various sorts of jewels, strings of coral beads and rows of shining gems; they contained also garlands of lotuses and other blossoms as well as many birds that uttered sweet notes like those of the Tāras.
When the time for my death has come and when the slayer of foes is ready, then surely does this fruit ripen in my heart.
O you of mighty arms, it behove not you (to act thus). Renouncing all that is dear and even your very life itself in this battle do you fight on.
I have told you all about why Vindhya does not grow. It is because of the power of Agastya which you had asked me (about).
Then Duryodhana, O king said these words to Durmukha-"O Dhurmuka! Here is the son of Radha deprived by Bhima from his car."
As Rāma, with his arrows furnished with wings of gold and furnished with pennons at their heads, was showering shafts upon the antagonist's person. The latter could not keep on speaking for a while as he had been struck by them in all parts of body; nor did he succeed in utterance even though every effort was put forth (by him).
I think that the prowess of Vali and Ravana is incomparable. But Hanuman is their equal in strength,
In the Krita age, virtue was seen in Brahmanas; and it rested on self-restraint, asceticism, and knowledge of the Vedas.
I do not see that tree or mountain, which is so firmly fixed in the earth as never to be broken by even wind.
If you wish us to proceed at once, let there be no delay. We shall go speedily to the city of Janaka.”
The Panchalas, the Kaikeya's and Matsya's, as also the Chedis, Karushaka and Kosala's seeing Yudhishthira began to assail Dronacharya.
It is wonderful in me that the sons of Pandu, who are superior to others and follow a high standard of morality have been brought down by you from their (high) status.
Vidura, with tears in his eyes and embracing the king's feet every moment, said repeatedly-Do not go without having taken proper precautions.
He, having accepted the hands of Sita in marriage and being accomplished with his acts as well as renowned by virtue, has forgotten her. What merit does he (Rāma) acquire through this act? Why is it not sinful on his part for fear of Lakşmana? And why did Rama order me to search out Sītă, when there was no reason for doing so?
Even if my mother lives, O Satrughna, as long she is looking after the son of Rāvana, that grief shall not be removed.
If one serves the virtuous, if he worships a poor ascetic or if be even serves an unrighteous man and obeys his orders in all things, then must he serve such people as those.
The energy of those great Adityas, O king of the celestials, is all in my one single eye.
Then was fought a terrible battle between Drona and his enemies in the darkness of night when all were fighting with each other.
The heroic Panchala, of excellent birth and worthy affection. Ever engaged in noble actions and endued with great energy on the field of battle.
O son of Shini, the Dasharha race do not protect their lives in battle. A cowardly retreat from a conflict is equally bad as abstention from fight itself.
All these high-souled warriors are accomplished in all kinds of weapons and versed also in various modes of fighting. Forsooth, O mighty monarch, they will surely slay us.”
Then that great lord, finding his consciousness restored and being in the midst of Dvalin's arms and gazing on all sides with a view to get out of the palace (of Kubera), thought for some time.
Then the Panchala prince, who was well skilled in weapons and who had his bow repeatedly drawn back and again released, began to fight with Shonashva.
In the twinkling of an eye, Bharadvaja's son took up another bow. Satyaki cut it off also with keen arrows and then Drona quickly taking up a third one strung it in haste and immediately he broke that too into fragments with sharp shafts.
In battle he is equal to Sankarshana in strength and surpasses all creatures on earth. The mace-throws of Bhima will be unable to withstand (Vrikodara).
And all the quarters were filled with darkness and no star nor planet was visible in the sky.
I am now afraid and distressed; my senses are stupefied. O Rāghava, by the treachery of Välina has our friendship been broken.
Hearing those words of the high-souled Rāma, Kaushika ordered his son-in-law Sántara (to go). And reaching Uttarasthān, and saluting there all the saints. They came down on the bank of Ganga; they beheld that huge city.
Listen now as I tell you what should be done in this connection. Becoming a golden deer, with beautiful spots of silver on your body and roaming about before Rāma's asylum near Sītā, please her so that she may wish for going wherever she likes (to the forest).
As wealth shines in the mountain when it is brought there, so a good man shines by being associated with other like-minded men.
If the Agni is established in a house, then gifts made outside that house are not blessed by him.
O son, do not grieve for your wicked mother. Taking a parashu Rama cut off his mother's head.
Thereupon, the slayer of Madhu (Krishna) who was then surrounded by all those Pandavas, said-"I will be your charioteer in this battle."
Then the ministers and all those great Rishis said-"Yes, let it be so!" And then pleased with them (the Pandavas), king Yudhishthira told his ministers that they should go next day.
Cutting off with his arrows all kinds of weapons used by the heroes of hostile ranks, Pandya killed them as Indra kills Asuras.
You should not grieve. Why do you, then? Cast off all your meat and every kind of food which is injurious in the first instance as well as that which is spoken by a liar.
Wellborn, noble and well-pleased with his wife; having children of pleasant behaviour; served by servants who have been properly trained in their duties; honoured (by the king) himself and also in every way worthy of honour.
Is the son of Vālika, in consequence of Arjuna having struck him with arrows discharged from Gandiva, still unconscious?
If a man gives away clarified butter mixed with curds, and also all kinds of food which are always in supply, he gets double the merit on occasions of full-moon and new moon.
Then the priest of Dhritarashtra offered a cow, Madhuparka and water for Agni (fire god).
Thereupon the royal sage, enraged at this conduct of his guests, said:-"If I am fallen and if you are not engaged in serving me; then I should be discarded by you as one deserving punishment for having offended against your Brahmanas. You ought never again to perform a sacrifice under my protection.”
Bhima, the sole hero of the Pandavas' army followed him on his car. Those two princes quickly came there with their cars; but they were maimed by Karna's shafts.
Like a lake filled with blossoms of lotuses, lilies and other flowers scattered in it by the hand of some one.
O Kausalyā, if Răma be well, why do not the oceans keep their bounds? Like a fire that springs at the end of an age (to consume the earth), his anger burns up all things.
Those who do not perform sacrifices cannot obtain this world; they are like the Pulindas and Sabaras, that live in forests.
O descendant of Bharata, the son of Pritha will be sent by Drona and Ashvatthaman (Drauni) Kripacharya as well to Yama's abode. The preceptor also viz., the grandson of Ganga in the person of Shantanu.
Having said this, the illustrious Shankara thus spoke to me. After that, my mother who is the great purifier of all things in the universe and who is ever ready with her arms outstretched for helping every one, called me by name as Sarvani or Tapasini, saying,-A son has been given to you O sinless one! He shall be known on Earth under the appellation of Samba.'
Undoubtedly, you have described the virtue of self-control in me. You know my promise with regard to offspring and I shall keep it as faithfully as you wish; even so will I fulfil that vow which I made formerly for money (to Yudhishthira). O truthful lady, once more do I swear by truth itself!
Let the rivers that flow from the foot of Mount Meru, and those also that are interlaced with each other on Earth or in Heaven (or any intermediate region), all come hither today.
O descendant of the Bharata race, this son of mine was not aware that he was being killed by his father.
Behold, O son of Sumitrā, the earth covered all over with particles of burning sand and gravel.
O son, listen now to me. I say this with love for you and it is highly beneficial to you; the words of a truthful man are never false.
Some again, by their pious speeches and eloquence, made the world believe in them. But these persons who were incapable of comprehending that which is uncomprehensible have been destroyed on account of what they said about morality when no proof could be brought for it.
O king, having his head covered with a silken cloth Yudhishthira looked like the full-moon of Pururavas.
I was never born in a family which had not the virtue of charity; nor did any member of my race ever fall into idleness for acquiring riches. But, O king! we have again fallen into this great danger.
Before this Vibhatsu had never spoken harsh words. Why did he, O son of Kunti, speak so roughly towards his friend?
O king, having thus prepared that hall for thirteen months I announced its completion before Dharamaraja.
O king, the whole field was filled with umbrellas and flags of gold and silver; it also contained various other celestial weapons.
Hearing that the great Rishi Garutmān had come, and learned of his maternal uncle Ashvapati's sending him so much wealth (for his maintenance), Kākutstha with his younger brother went out for receiving that mendicant. And he worshipped the ascetic like Shakra worshipping Brihaspati himself.
Seeing Partha with his mind dissatisfied, sighing again and again, Vyas said, “What is this? Is it a worm or the hair of your head that has been covered by oil or water mixed with flour in which you have rolled yourself. Or perhaps some Brahmana was killed at thy hand while he followed thee for protection."
He, who having learnt that his preceptor has performed the act of self-destruction and is certain of its efficacy knows himself as possessed by a true knowledge. The person who with an agreeable heart considers such matters as these, is said to be in possession of Brahma's third foot (i.e., he acquires religious merit).
Hearing those words of the Daityas, that best among men (Indra), controlling his mind and taking counsel with himself, ordered an army consisting of chariots, elephants and horses as well as infantry resembling a mighty flood.
In that battle, O king the son of Madhava smilingly cut off with his razor-edged discus in battle the bow of Kuru's chief archer.
And Laksmana had been kept in Angada's house for a year; and now that his son was able, he returned to Ayodhyā.
That foremost of all persons, that mighty lord Shauri (Krishna) remembering king Jarasandha who was the strongest among strong men and whose prowess equalled a tiger's, remembered also his own royal self, in whom there were truthfulness, mercy and might. The son of Madhu knew well how one should behave towards himself when he is chosen as the representative of others; therefore desirous of killing Hala-dharan and following the injunctions of the Vedas, Haladhara's younger brother went forth for battle with those enemies of theirs who had been selected by him.
He who kills a woman, or a child or an old man; he who attacks those that are unarmed and unprepared for fight;
A foolish man, who praises himself in this world only with the help of his own self-praise and without possessing any merit or learning, shines here.
Beholding the mild and wellbred elephants of Sahadeva, that foremost man among men Virata gave him (Sahadeva) many sorts of wealth.
The beautiful lady quickly worshipped Chyavana, who was an excellent servitor of Agni and guests.
The people do not live in this world by the sole agency of fate, for they have acquired that which is their heart's desire. It has been obtained through acts performed in a former life.
Hear also another mystery, a sacred truth. What the preceptors say should always be accepted by persons who have faith in them.
Who leaving his kingdom and all the riches he had acquired, would go away as a mendicant without taking with him that messenger of heaven.
The man who is desirous of obtaining the fruits of actions which are not his own, but which he has obtained from others, falls into a fire of lust for worldly objects. He then sinks like an insect in its flame (of attraction) when it comes near a burning lamp.
Tarakshya said Tell me in full, as I ask you. Why did you come here? You are the foremost of all knowers and performers (of sacrifices). By your instructions only have I acquired knowledge about the ancient Vedic rites connected with Agnihotra sacrifice!
O chastiser of foes, I have come here with the object of securing a boon from you. By your command, o king of kings, shall 1 again be subject to you; and this truly do l promise you. And my words are never untrue even in jesting speech.
Thus deeply wounded, O mighty monarch and bathed in blood he looked like a Asoka tree during the spring season covered with flowers.
Having left Janaka's daughter in the midst of Rāma and Laksmana, what do we require those foremost monkeys? We should ourselves go there; slaying all these best of monkey-leaders. And seeing again Raghava with Lakşmaņa as well as Sugriva.
That intelligence which is complete in eight branches and that has as its root the means of acquiring all desirable objects, O king, that consists of Shruti (scriptures) Smriti (tradition), etc., and that leads one to final liberation, exists in you.
I have come here for doing what you desire. O learned in the science of virtue, instruct me and I shall do whatever pleases you.
The clothes of those who eat and drink the same thing are all equally clean, as also their garments.
Dhritarashtra said Thus, O Sanjaya, was this army of various kinds and well-trained in war thus drawn up by the king (Duryodhana) according to due rites.
Seeing that mountain resembling a mass of clouds, Karna did not tremble in the least and carried those weapons with great ease.
Yudhishthira said : Which of the four orders, viz., that of householders or ascetics, mendicants and those who lead the life of Vanaprasthas, he should follow, in order to acquire success which deity is worthy of being worshipped by him?
O Partha, you cannot conquer this city by any means. Therefore turn back for your welfare and safety; it is enough what we have done today."
At the twelfth and at the sixteenth hour of night, king Yudhishthira took his food in due time.
Janamejaya said : Having granted the boon, O best of Brahmanas, what did Govinda then do? What great deeds were performed by that illustrious hero thereafter.
The life of the household is superior to that of Vanaprastha; and the latter in turn, is better than renunciation. Then comes knowledge which is called Adhyatma and it is higher even than Renunciation.
On those charming and fragrant mountains, O foremost of Brahmanas, all the birds began to utter sweet sounds.
Covered as he was by Karna, the son of Pandu's son that mighty car-warrior cut off his bow in battle.
Then that huge-bodied one, his body cut into a hundred pieces in battle and deprived of life as he was, lay on the field with all energy gone out.
Beholding those two great car-warriors, engaged in battle with the utmost exertions, O monarch, Ashvathama was highly pleased and spoke thus:-
O Rāma, you have been informed of your danger and the cause that has given rise thereto. You are competent for preventing it; do what is necessary to avert this calamity!
Recollecting his former birth, he has acquired the highest tranquillity. He does not eat even food offered by others.
As a minute body, when moved by the eye along with its light (rays), seems very large and like great things; so understanding follows an object through various stages.
Vaishampayana said Having approached his grandsire and preceptor, Yudhishthira saluting him began thus, O king.
Covered by the shower of arrows, Arjuna is not visible like the sun. O Shalya, this then appears as an end for Partha in that ocean of battle."
That twice-born person who eats food mixed with clarified butter, but whose senses are under restraint and who has renounced all speech is entitled to the merit of a fast.
Thereupon the wind blew through his joints and body, like a shower of rain in summer. The greatly powerful (Rama) then cleared away for him a path among those trees entangled with creepers.
Karna became angry and discharged at him sharp arrows. He also received those shafts, but gave back a greater number of them.
O Pingleyed one, Dushasana with a beautiful countenance and having elephants for his arms stood in the rear of your army alongwith his troops.
Having travelled half a month on the way, that army of Kekaya's race came up with joyful and well-fed troops.
Thereupon, the son of Subala angrily hurled at Pandu's sons a mighty dart like that of Death himself.
Shukra said : He who always bears the taunts of others and knows all that is divine, he has conquered everything. One should know him as one who restrains his anger like a driver restraining an excited horse or like a person who moves in darkness.
In the end of an Yuga, fathers will eat their sons and sons in turn shall cat up their fathers.
Bhishma said We should not offer him any conciliatory treatment; for he does not deserve it. He is the most senior of all men, and yet he has no respect for Krishna's authority (to rule over us).
This is the son of Kunti, who has come with his chariot yoked with white horses and Krishna as their driver. He will be a great difficulty for all our troops like some calamity in life; he kills your enemies (the Pandavas).
O king, after the fall of Kripa in battle and also that of Bhishma. Ashvatthaman ran away from the field where the Pandavas were fighting.
Those two heroes, who have eyes resembling lotus petals and whose heads are graced with matted locks, both having come down from the region of celestials, do not look like each other.
O gentle king, this sacred river of pure water is the daughter of Badari and frequented by the gods.
I know also that he is my own son. But if, in obedience to her behests, I accept this boy as mine, people will suspect me and say "He was not begotten by the king."
Those foremost of men, the sons of Draupadi rushed against Drona as if they were lions in a herd and what brave warriors there are who could check them? These twelve boys gave up their games after having played for twenty years. They then lived with Bhishma observing excellent vows.
The two sons of Draupadi also, Krishna and Dhananjaya, were greatly delighted with the slaughter. Beholding him slain on the field, all his soldiers began to utter leonine roars in unison.
Yudhishthira said You are the eye of all things; you are the soul of every embodied being, and you are the origin of all creatures.
Then raising him up, Kumbhakarma of a huge body and resembling the Sun in effulgence rushed against his antagonist. And he looked like Meru with its dreadful peaks towering into the sky.
The Abhaga said : He who has taken your daughter in marriage, saying that he will give her a certain amount of money (as dower), should be punished with death; for such an act is like falsehood and creates enmity between good men.
Sanjaya said Thereupon Vasudeva, who was seated on his chariot and whose mind had been occupied by the thought of Sishupala's death (in battle), addressed thus in reply to Dushasana, "O son of Radha, it is due to good fortune that you have become aware of your sin. As a general rule people are drowned in vice but they blame not Destiny for their misdeeds;
Having thus addressed Nala and given him a dress, O Kuru prince the king of men disappeared there very soon.
Thereupon, at some time or other a celestial messenger (Yama) appeared in his invisible form and addressed Vasava thus.
Remembering the wrongs which have been done by you, and remembering your alliance with me in this affair of mine, I shall destroy all those low wretches who will try to take my kingdom.
O ruler of men, my life will be over for the reason that I have given up food. My body will then dissolve into atoms and enter upon a path which is infallible."
Does Kunti, O king, serve you without the least pride? She who abandoning her own son was engaged in serving your preceptor.
That which is not dependent on Time, and that which has no beginning nor end, was ordained before this; it forms the subject of discourse in all religious books.
A Brahmana, by virtue of his knowledge and the rites he has studied in his life, can do what he likes. The embryo then lives again and again within many other wombs (before it is born).
May your mind, O you of dwarf body and always engaged in giving away wealth as a sacrifice, be ever bent upon the acquisition of virtue!
O best of men, having come out from the womb he saw his second birth and then he saw those Brahmana Rishis who were well-versed in all branches of knowledge.
O king, there arose a terrible conflict between the shafts that were pure and straightflying like snakes with their fangs drawn back.
Then, bowing down before you, the Pandavas and all those Rishis of righteous conduct set out again with cheerful hearts.
O Sanjaya, Krishna and Pandu's son entered the battle without being opposed.
That best of the twice-born persons pierced through Shataki's host. The latter being thus disconcerted, fell down on earth and cut off his head with a sword.
Markandeya said : O Yudhisthira, hear about the great fortune of women. I shall tell you all that happened in connection with Savitri's royal birth.
O foremost of Bharata's race, Udadalaka and Katha as also Shveta who was highly famous; Bharadvaja and Kaunkutsya, Artisena and Gautama.
The Kadamba trees which had been filled with flowers, were being struck by arrows and their branches cut down. Slowly they dropped the cupidity that they felt on account of those beautiful flowers.
The wind blew with sand and dust, the points of heaven were covered over by darkness. In that celestial region there arose a loud noise amongst the celestials.
Hearing those words of his, the heroic Shrutakirti, that mighty car-warrior encountered Ashvathaman and covered him with showers of shafts.
When an enemy is weak and emaciated, when he suffers from disease, when his spirits are down and his appetite gone, when he has lost all hope of victory or even life itself; then should a blow be struck at him.
Ashtaka said : How can a town exist behind this forest? And how also may the forest come to be after it.
From the energy of the wind comes water and from it earth. These eight elements, which are called roots (of all things), exist in every thing that exists.
Like a hermit in the forest, you speak of virtue. And like an ascetic who has renounced his rod and staff, O son of Pritha!
Thereupon that huge and highly experienced one (Arjuna) began to pierce those warriors in return, with his iron arrows.
Sound, touch and form and taste and smell are perceptible by the mind. And that which perceives is omnipresent.
The wise do not like the conduct of a man who destroys his own family by injuring those that are related to it.
Jealousy, anger and abusive language are all signs of foolishness. Therefore it is proper that the wise man should never be angry; for this kind of conduct has always been condemned by men of wisdom as not right.
Then with his arrows, O Bharata, he pierced that terrible and strong-minded Bhima adorned in a golden garland like the wind tearing up large trees on earth.
And as the sound of clouds touched heaven, it also awoke Yudhishthira, that best among kings and foremost in his race.
I am always engaged in performing the svastiyana (auspicious ceremonies) for kine and Brahmanas. The people are all desirous of having me as their ruler,
Those, who are versed in the Shastras and know what is beyond the senses of all creatures, have no birth or death.
How can they, who are the protectors of those two foremost men (Krishna and Arjuna) that have taken refuge in them for their own good, be defeated by the sons of Pritha.
I shall again tell you the words that have been spoken before. O son of Radha, listen to me; if a beggar with his alms bowl in hand asks for them give him your ear-rings."
And he saw there, innumerable edifices of variegated designs and made up of jewels like unto the thunderbolt or the tree Vātaraņa.
The wife of that wonderful Rishi was herself a wonder. His son was Vibhu and his daughter Asikni; as many fires have been created by Agni, so many Somas were produced from the waters. All these creatures originated in the mind of Brahman.
Having been thus addressed by Rudra, the king with a white beard did all that had been ordered by him holding his trident. After twelve years Maheshvara returned (to Kailasa).
Understanding is the power of making distinctions. The mind which has understanding as its essence, should be known from actions and inference (as being identical with) Knowledge).
A large and excellent bed, covered with a white sheet; furnished with pillows and bolstered by blankets. The room was filled with perfumes of flowers and the atmosphere (within it) reeked with various scents.
Asita, Devala and Narada, Parvata and Kakshivat. Jamadagni's son Rama, Atmavana, Vashishtha and Jamdagnya, Vishvamitra Atri, Bharadvaja Harishtma, Kundadhara Shrutashrava (all these) highly praised the great God Visnu in their minds by means of various similes taken from animals; and they obtained success through his favour on account of their ascetic austerities.
I do not see the Rakshasa who can inspire him with fear. You are at peace; there is no such thing as a Yaksha in this world,
I, who am wicked-minded and foolish and increase the fears of my kinsmen have installed Duryodhana as king over all the Kurus.
I am that Brahma-svarga which is destroyed by the dust of ignorance. See what kind of person I was after eating my share from a sacrificial offering in this world!
Having saluted the Narayana, that foremost of men and having offered my adorations also to Sarasvati and Vyasa I am going now to pronounce their victory.
The man who gives a cow with the usual presents, decked out in golden ornaments and having horns made of silver and clad in silken raiment furnished with costly blankets for her back, obtains all objects of desire.
In that delightful and great forest, there were showers of flowers in all directions. There also danced the Apsaras with each other.
The Sadhyas said : Who is there that takes pleasure in the company of Brahmanas? Who is he who finds his joy with many people. Who is powerful though weak, and what one does not get involved in their quarrels?
Bharadvaja said : O greatly wise one, why is the universe called by names which denote great elements? When that Creator created those five things in days of yore how did he acquire their nature.
In the house of Jatyu, that Nishadi woman having five sons and accompanied by her children was burnt with them.
He who kills his father, and he also whose father is killed by him, are both without remorse; they never feel any pain.
Seeing the Sun, Vidura said : As Meru is always being circumambulated by you. So do it with me also! Thus addressed by Shaila (the king of mountains), Surya replied 'I am not willing to walk round this mountain at my own will; I shall walk in that direction for which there are already appointed roads and through which has been created this universe.'
Have you acquired weapons and received them with due rites from the king of celestials, O son of Pandu? Did Vasava, gratified with you give away those weapons.
Those who are possessed of controlled souls and observant in all respects, observe the duties of life according to their proper place. They always live as a unit even when they have fallen into distress or danger.
The king, who is not protected by his subjects and does not protect them in return and who takes one sixth part of the produce as tribute from all classes of people; that wicked man (the ruler) is called a great sinner among men.
The chastiser of Paka did not see him as he was shooting his arrows nor when he had stopped the arrow.
There is none equal to me in the world for fighting with maces; there was no one who could resist or defeat me.
Saying, “So be it," the son of Kunti saluted his grandfather and went with all those ladies into the city called Nagasahvaya.
I do not remember that I had any connection with you about religion, pleasure and profit. Go where you like or stay as much as you please; do whatever pleases your heart."
O Partha, perform the Kshatriya duties and please your ancestors as also the celestials. The fever in your mind will be removed thereby."
Thus addressed by Rama, Laksmana said : I know not the name of this pair of ear-rings and also not that of these bracelets.
O king, you are the foremost of all righteous men and even equal in prowess with Vasava himself. Why do not we again render you happy by giving vent to your sorrow?
Surrounded by many kings, who had come for our welfare and were accompanied with their forces and followers.
Having thus comforted Vaidehi, Hanumān the son of Maruta determined upon going (in search of Sītā) and again spoke as follows.
O hero, this doubt is still present in my mind. How will that highly powerful one cross the sea when he has such a large army consisting of horses and elephants?
How can you, O Laksmana, bear the loss of that lady who had followed me and my fall from sovereignty and whose heart was so sore stricken?
Yudhishthira said What are the food and what are not, O Bharata, for a Brahmana? And also what are they for Kshatriya's and Vaishyas as well as Shudras.
I think that Rāma shall come here in the morning. You are anxious for seeing him, therefore you will see him coming hither."
Maitreya said : You are certainly a man of purified soul. You know the merit that is attached with gifts and penances, as also with purity and truthfulness in speech.
Who is there who, desirous of life in battle, would engage with all those heroes invincible in fight and accompanied by their troops, like a deer rushing at lions enraged?
They are at one with all creatures and know every thing, having full vision. They have the knowledge of Vedas and Shastras; they possess a clear understanding in respect to truth (the nature of Brahma).
Then, O king, they closed with one another and stood facing each other for a while; that battle which then commenced was like any ordinary encounter.
O best of kings, the men who are cruel and wicked in their conduct should be killed by you for they have no regard for virtue, wealth or pleasure.
Beholding that dreadful mace resembling the rod of Yama and uplifted like a thunder-bolt, O king, those spectators looked at it in amazement.
Having himself ascertained the time, Sugriva will surely understand his own interest and act accordingly.
I am so terrified by the high-souled Rāma, that what he is able to do for me, I cannot return.
Having heard those words of theirs who were attached to Yudhishthira, that wicked-minded Duryodhana was burning in anger.
The arrows of Cupid, which have been discharged from my heart in consequence of the sight of your lotus-like face and which are very sharp because they are sharpened by grief for separation. O you having fair waist, those terrible shafts having their points made hard with rage, that were originally released as a result of excess of joy (in beholding you) but became terribly fierce on account of excessive anger at being separated from me; these powerful ones piercing through all obstacles like lightening should be withdrawn out of this body of mine, before I become mad with madness caused by them.
Thereupon, when they had fallen down on the ground and were killed by that one of great strength in battle. All his army fled away in ten different directions out of fear (for him).
There, where the lord Madhava suddenly came out from his house with a view of going for hunting and blowing his best bow-string.
Paundra, Vasudeva (Vasudeva), Vanga, Kalinga, Akrasa, Kunthalas and the Malavas.
The acquisition of birth is the greatest happiness when one's mind becomes purified. That which forms great happiness for persons gifted with knowledge and virtue,
Then Vrikodara quickly cut off the bow and standard of your son. He then struck his head with arrows, took out its eyes as well as that of the charioteer from their respective heads.
Bhishma said The king of the celestials, accompanied by the gods, started in a car from his capital. He saw Vritra standing before him like an inaccessible mountain.
One who is born as a mortal being owes his existence (to the gods, guests and servants) and he therefore should pay off all debts.
My maternal uncle, named Satrujaya (the conqueror of enemies) gave me a hundred pieces of gold. I give them all to you O best among the twice-born ones!
Then that powerful one performed a hundred horse-sacrifices on the Yamuna. And he offered three hundreds of horses in the Sarasvati, and four hundreds in the Ganga.
And rising at the dawn of day, that subduer of foes performed his morning rites. Then Rāghava's descendant approached a certain ascetic and said : "Having saluted you with my respects I have come here for obtaining your permission; it behove you therefore to permit me.”
Thereupon, O Karna, in that great battle the arrows of your enemies covered with blood and angry as serpents rushed into the earth.
O great king, I wish you well! The ocean of your wishes is now filled. Therefore shall we with all our followers kill those enemies who are the foes of Indra and that bear Kala's name."
The wives and sons of the king, as also his friends and kinsmen all lament when a ruler becomes negligent.
These bodies of creatures, O lord of the celestials, are also subject to destruction. Therefore do I not grieve for them; nor am I guilty in this matter.
Vaishampayana said : When the son of Devaki was about to depart, ten great car-warriors and mighty bowmen afflicted with grief on account of their enemy's victory began to follow him.
Your countenance is beautiful, your limbs are perfectly proportioned; and you have a charming carriage. And with the help of that beauty which radiates from your face like the moon in purity,
Janamejaya said : O exalted one, how was the race of Andhaka destroyed along with that of Vrishni by those great car-warriors, namely the Bhojas and Vasudeva before my very eyes?
The wise say that religion has four feet. I shall now describe the way which is auspicious and beneficial for you, O twice born ones.
O king, one who does not give away land cannot acquire it; and he that has no vehicle can never ride in a car. He who gives way his desires only gains them when they are fulfilled."
And again with the excellent and highly polished shield furnished with hundred moons, he began to move about on that field of battle.
He (the king) being thus suddenly startled at the unexpected arrival of that Brahmana, came out where he stood alone.
When the battle thus began with elephants and horses and chariots, when it was covered by clouds of dust, they then killed their own enemies.
Then that foremost of the Sini race (Karna), with ten sharp arrows, pierced the charioteer and horses as well as the standard of Kritavarman.
I have been told that you had fought with Antaka, who was difficult of being vanquished in battle and whom you defeated without the least fear.
With the slain, with those that were being killed and with others that had fallen down on the ground; with those who were flying away from battle-field and uttering inauspicious cries.
I wish, therefore, by this horse-sacrifice of mine to acquire the power which is in the son of a Rishi. By virtue of that influence which belongs only to such children and which is so great, it will be possible for me to obtain every object of my desire.'
Having heard the truth of Vishnu, like ambrosia, those celestials became filled with joy. They were greatly astonished and said "O Lord! O God! How could you do this?
When a person does not fear, when one is not afraid of us and when he has no desire and his eyes do not turn in all directions then the end of Brahma is said to be attained.
O monkey, the ornaments of monkeys are their tails. Therefore let that (monkey) be quickly burnt up by whom they have been stolen and he himself also go away with them."
Then, O king of kings that powerful and excellent prince together with his brothers worshipped the twice-born ones in due form.
Having said this, that powerful son of Drona (Ashvatthaman), for the benefit and confusion of all creatures discharged that weapon.
Having said this, that king consoled all his people who were stricken with grief. He then thus spoke to the ruler of wealth,-Bring me my riches.'
Neither the Yakshas, nor Gandharvas, nor Pishachas, nor Rakshsasa, nor Kinnaras, neither men can acquire happiness.
O Narada, I shall now tell you the whole truth. Beholding your great power of intellect and learning, that celestial Rishi asked me about it all.
Thus wounded by the son of Suta, he covered his body with a shower of arrows. He then pierced Karna in return with nine shafts furnished with wings and whetted on stone.
Seeing his army broken and routed by the enemy, Drona said "These heroes are not able to bear any longer this battle; let them therefore fly from here."
This arrow of mine was not before discharged for the destruction of Rāvana. O Śatrughna, I have shot it in order that a great laugh might be given by all creatures.
Then, with the view of destroying that weapon which was incapable of being baffled by any other weapons and also for displaying my prowess I hurled at it a Brahma-weapon. That terrible weapon looked like the universal destruction (at the end of Yuga).
Hearing their discourse, the king of Rakshasas came there in a terrible form and with a terrific roar.
The man who, day after day, gets such a blessing from the celestials that he may be able to maintain his body for one year without taking any food, should then feed Brahmanas or make gifts of clarified butter. Beyond this fast no other is advisable." This was said by Vishnu himself in days of yore.
Then he (the king) took a golden necklace which was as large and heavy as the mountain.
As long as the celestials and the Brahmanas do not quarrel with you, this your rod will be useful. If they ever take offence at you it shall prove useless.
The four modes of life are known as Vanaprastha. Some adopt the practice of performing ablutions every day, and some perform them once in a month.
This was the region which in ancient times, O Kakutstha, Indra had inhabited. It is here that he ranged over the earth when Diti became successful through asceticism.
The men saw various kinds of waters, viz., the Kalpa and Churnaka (waters), as well as baths of all sorts. They also saw thousands upon thousand pairs of sandals in sacred places situated on banks of rivers or by lakes; they also saw white-coloured teeth arranged according to their respective sizes for use in dancing; they then found many golden vessels full of water placed on beaches of oceans; they beheld many mirrors polished with sand rubbed against them, and heaps of cloths belonging to different persons; thousands of shoes lying scattered about here and there, hundreds of shields made of tortoise-shell, swords and bows; and many beautiful dresses embroidered with designs depicting human organs.
The night-ranger, Vidyunmali having speed as his special attribute, quickly descended from the chariot and stood on earth with a mace in his hand.
The trees of this king are all loaded with fruits and flowers. This excellent Saru, having no thorns whatever is the tree of Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti.
Sanjaya said Then, inspecting the division of Pritha's son that was invincible and had no equal in point of numbers and which also was protected by Dhrishtadyumna.
Then Kumbhakarna, waxing worth with anger and riding on elephants that had their temples made of gold, rushed at the monkeys possessed by a fury like that of lions.
Arjuna said : I have no enemy who is as learned in the Vedas, and myself am like a son to you. There exists not any man on earth who can defeat you in battle.
When the work of their friends, which was very difficult and arduous, had been accomplished by them all with cheerfulness, a loud leonine roar arose from those celestials.
With their arms and hands cut off with swords, the bodies of some were seen lying on earth with blood oozing out from their sides.
The two sons of Draupadi, as also Satyaki, suddenly attacked the son of Radha. Seeing that the latter was about to advance towards himself,
Vaishampayana said : Having waited for fourteen days, the high-minded Rama showed himself to those Brāhmaṇas and Dharmaraja with his younger brother.
Seeing him in the guise of a Chandala and forsaking that one, all his ministers with those citizens who were devoted to him fled away. But Rāma went alone, being possessed by high soul.
I shall do your bidding. Go back and deliberate, O son of Pritha (Dhristadyumna) is not Drona ever killed in battle?
Tell me the truth about universal deliverance, O you of sweet smiles. I shall then quickly put my mind at rest."
And like the sky filled with thunderbolts, he felt a pain in his vitals as if pierced by flashes of lightning.
Bhima, having heard these words of his preceptor and being filled with wrath spoke thus in a voice trembling with anger.
Then seeing him on the car, that best of monkeys-Susena-suddenly brought down with a huge mountain-peak his chariot.
The great king performed the funeral rites of his beloved wife, Madayanti with Vasishtha and other friends. Then he went up to heaven.
Yudhishthira said How can a person be happy, how does one acquire beauty and prosperity in the face of his faults?
And I shall attain eternal regions, having been slain in the sacred Panchaka. Hearing of this death of their king all thousand people fled away from ten cardinal points filled with tears.
O king, hear of that hair-stirring battle between Drona and the Pandavas headed by Yuyudhana.
The Brahmana's property has been stolen by the thief, and all his wealth is gone. He was about to weep before me; do you then teach him how to wield weapons?
When that upholder of the Kaurava race Bhishma is no more, then all men will be in a state of great confusion. Therefore do I urge you."
Before me, by my own power and in the field of Vichitravirya (the father of Duryodhana) was born that one of great intelligence.
This Brahmana, having been duly adored by the king with the Samhita (of the Vedas), was sent away and he went up into heaven.
The king, obedient to the injunctions of the Vedas and other scriptures performed all kinds of sacrifices with proper vehicles for carrying them on.
And by which the intelligent Indra was deprived of his thunderbolt and also in battle, that weapon belonging to the king of waters (i.e. Varuna) was baffled;
If you desire, O king of the Kuru race that your son Duryodhana may live in peace with the Pandavas.
Hearing the words of Satyaki and seeing his chariot, decked with gold ornaments, furnished with a goodly standard bearing the device of golden lotus, shining like the sun in effulgence and having as its flag-staff an excellent lance adorned by various gems; he also saw that it was graced with many beautiful flags. The highly powerful son of Daruka (Satyaki) stood before him holding up his bow drawn back for shooting. With folded hands he informed Krishna about all these things.
O son of Raghu, if you have any faith in my hearing, then do I hear your words. This is the vision that has been implanted in me by all the gods and it will never be changed.
O great king, this action of yours was done for the sake of fame. But it cannot be said that you will derive any fruit from it; on the other hand all your efforts are useless and worthless in view of renunciation which is productive of mighty fruits.
Having worshipped the scion of Dasharha's race, who is adored in all worlds and then having informed him (of their arrival), they began to search for a suitable residence.
O king, know me as a person who has come here for the sake of my preceptor. The wise have said that there is no occasion which justifies violence in seeking one's own good.
He, however, who commits a sin thinks that none sees him and his act. The celestials too see everything including the acts of men which they do in secrecy from human eyes.
O Rāghava, if he do go down to the nether regions or even further than that (Patala), still he shall not be able to come out of my clutches.
In the same place there flowed from those trees various kinds of honey. The person, taking shelter under them drank that nectar every day.
When the sacrificer, with all his retinue of priests and guests shall have gone round in this manner the whole earth. What will be your feelings then? I do not see any garland on you; nor umbrella over head or fan at hand for keeping off heat and dust from your body. Nor do I see a necklace round your neck, O lord of Asuras!
Bhishma said Vasudeva is the great soul and he is adored by all the celestials. O best of Bharata's race, no one greater than that lotus-eyed being (Krishna) can be seen anywhere in this world.
That great Rishi, Parashara of highly ascetic merit became a father. I have heard that he was formerly the son of Satyavati and had been known by the name of Dvaipayana (the son born on an island).
The mendicant should be content with a single piece of cloth, the bark of trees and fruits without any help. He who thus treats all creatures is said to have his abode in one only forid.
O sire, Bhima had wounded him with many arrows. He was covered all over with blood and he shone like a fully blooming Ashoka tree in the midst of clouds.
Hearing the mandate of that high-souled lord of riches, I have come to you without any hesitation. Do you accept me."
Narayana said O you, the most illustrious of all creatures and the creator himself! Those protectors of this world who have protected in ancient times the creation made by thee are worthy of being honoured.
The form of water is above all gross bodies, and the sun's form stands over that. Water should be considered as fourth; and speech has been said by wise men to stand for spiritual knowledge.
The king of the Madras was thus humiliated by his enemies. And that boy, (Abhimanyu) also fell down through sin."
Beholding his arms cut off, Rāma suddenly rushed against the Rakşasa roaring like a thunder-bolt. And seizing up two sharpened swords of moon-like splendour he hewed down in conflict the feet of that demon.
O king, your sufferings from poison will not continue long and you shall always be victorious in battles.
The Danavas said O king, Suyodhana of the Bharata race is always surrounded by brave and high-souled men.
Those who distribute food, those that speak the truth and those that make gifts without being asked or begged for are all regarded as equal.
You have done this (deed of abducting Sita) in the very presence of Vali, O Rama. It is therefore impossible for you to explain it away by means of excuses."
Then the army of Dhritarashtra's son uttered loud cries and became pale-faced beholding Karna thus engaged.
O king, all the people then came and told Shalva that their enemy had been killed by one of his ministers.
O Bhishma, the great ascetic Hanuman shall certainly beget offspring on your daughter in the city of Vichitravirya.
I had thought of striking them (Arjuna and Keshava) with this weapon, which is terrible in the extreme. Who would not kill those two heroes?
Ketusvarya, the energetic and young younger brother of Satyaki, fought on the side of his own illustrious brothers with that famous Pandava (Arjuna).
Brihannala said It is well known in the world that Partha's Gandiva, by which he used formerly to kill enemy hosts.
O mighty-minded monkey, this is not our purpose; we are commanded by the monarch of monkeys and intelligent Rāma that you should range through the excellent western quarter.
In that battle Arjuna cut-off the arms of those five terrible Asuras, armed with swords and weapons. Those arms were broad-chested and well-formed and adorned with sandal paste; they also had innumerable teeth like a snake's fangs.
The ground was covered with the troops of Panchala and Brahmanas, who had come there.
He was very much afraid of his own relatives and he knew not how to govern the kingdom. O Krishna, that fear is increased by your friendship with me."
Having assumed the form of a terrible jackal, he began to range through that forest. He then saw all those sons born on Draupadi except Somakarna.
All those foolish friends of Rāma, being over-whelmed with grief and oppressed by the burden thereof did not lie down.
Then the monkey-chief, Dvivida tore up that mountain and fled away as a torrent of water flows through its channels.
The elements are made up of various qualities. They, again, originate from the senses and objects. All creatures have been created by Him as His own body;
Passing over all that, the slayer of Madhu said, “We shall stay here for a certain time in order to serve Yudhishthira's interests.
What heroes of my army, unable to be overpowered in battle and fearless like lions have fought with the son of Kunti who is invincible?
And, O son of Sumitrā, the birds mixed with men and delighted at your array were sweetly singing.
Those men who do not think of their own merits and possessions when these are destroyed, succeed in freeing themselves from the bonds produced by attachment.
As the Destroyer, created by Time at the end of a Yuga for destroying all creatures and bringing about dissolution himself is irresistible in battle; so also that foremost of men Arjuna having his hair bound up with diadem which wields weapons like water pouring down from clouds.
Seeing her thus, the ascetic said to that great river; "Go without delay and bring Vasishtha here."
When you have been deprived of your kingdom, how can I trust you? How shall we live together again after this insult (inflicted by us)?
The understanding of all creatures and the power of procreation are called their Mitra or friend; while the soul, which is in all things that have life, has been said by wise men to be Adhyatma.
If Bhimasena be slain or if he be deprived of his senses, then Pritha's son will attack me. In this case it is good for us that we should meet him as soon as possible."
Do you live in the forest, observing all its rules and regulating your reason? And is not Gandhari afflicted with grief on account of her daughter-in-law.
Praise being thus showered upon him by the celestials Rishis and worshipped in return, he shone like a newly risen sun.
As I did when fighting with the enemies in my former life, so now will I destroy those angry sons of Dhritarashtra.
By performing virtuous deeds one is purified of his sins. When he has been thus purifled, he cannot commit the same sin again and so becomes freed from it for ever.
Having rested and refreshed himself, the highly energetic one told his father everything about that great battle.
O fair lady, summon with all their attendants Shakra and those women who worship Brahma.
That great car-warrior, then cut off the four horses of Satyaki and struck down his driver from his seat.
The son of Phalguna cut-off with his sharp arrows, the heads (of those warriors), their bows and horses yokes as well as arms.
Like two huge elephants striking each other with their tusks, they wounded and killed one another by arrows shot off from full-drawn bows.
Bhishma is competent for this and he will be able, united with us all in battle, to vanquish the enemy. Therefore let your fear vanish from you O best of the Bharata race."
Having lost her husband, she was very much afflicted with grief. Then the princess thus spoke in great sorrow to that best of ascetics (Vasishtha), saying "What shall I do?"
They saw no golden jars, or plates, or dishes, or drinking cups, or goblets of the best workmanship.
O son of Pritha, we shall be happy after seeing you for a long time.
And they also (the Kauravas) having horses and elephants, furnished with excellent seats of ivory, began to feed them.
O best of men, your brother was youthful and beloved by me; but he died while still a child. These two princesses are the daughters of Kashiraja's daughter, O Bharata! They have both attained youth and beauty and they wish for children, therefore it behoves you, O mighty armed one, in obedience to my behests, to perform what is virtuous.
With banners and standards, with an army of foot soldiers and cavalry and elephants; the huge car-warrior (Yudhishthira), his four divisions well arranged in battle array, resounding like a cloud.
The celestials have been killed in battle and the three worlds are being robbed of their wealth. And showers from all sides, as large as mountains, are falling down (on earth).
As he was reciting the Chikshu, that best of celestials-the lord of all the Marutas-was present there. The Sadhyas and Ashvins also came there and went round him (in a body).
When, on the bare earth of Śādvali's house, Sītā was being dragged away by her enemies, this ornament and appearance vanished (from Ravana).
He saw that exceedingly auspicious lady, who shone by the light of her penances and whom none in heaven or earth could look at; as if she were a most excellent illusory work created out of various kinds of Maya. Her person was covered with smoke like fire; and also appeared beautiful like the full moon enveloped by dark clouds; or like a fiery flame surrounded by thick darkness, immeasurable (in its extent) like water in the midst of air having splendour equal to the sun's rays.
O foremost of men, this virtuous speech which is consistent with the practice of virtue and proper for governing kingdoms has been uttered by you.
Then he saw a small house in the midst of an empty field, all around which was covered with brambles.
Keshava gave away hundreds and thousands of gold ornaments, gems, golden images with all their splendour.
Thereupon, the fearful Shatavati (river) encircled him with her arms; and she struck Parikshit on his back side.
Those foolish warriors, saying "This is Arjuna. This Govinda. These are the sons of Pandu and those are Krishna," began to kill one another in battle (without knowing it).
He, who has created the universe through his penances, becomes himself an object of creation and he is also the lord of all objects.
Thus, like men curing an ailment with medicine and incantations the Pandavas rushed at Karna that scorcher of foes who resembled Death himself in anger.
Your vital air has been checked and the five life principles have also become inert; your senses are perfectly under control, all placed in order.
Hearing this, the son of Dharma became greatly agitated. He considered Karna's armour as invulnerable and that he was possessed with great strength; but his mind could not be set at rest by reflecting on all those troubles which had already been encountered.
The king said : If your devotion and penances be fruitless, go away. O Brahmana; I am a performer of sacrifices; you will get the fruits (of what you have performed) from me.
On the next day, when after rains there were showers of flowers from all sides and which had been shed by the trees on account of the rain; when music was played in various ways for rejoicing the hearts (of men); and when those forests looked resplendent with their blossoms that had come out through copious showers.
Taking the two feet of his preceptor in reverence, and with joined hands, he said:-'O illustrious one! if you are pleased with me for my having worshipped you according to due rites. I have a great doubt which it is your duty to remove.'
Thereafter, when the Rakshasas were being slaughtered by that arrowy shower, their excellent chariots having golden yokes and standards, together with horses of huge chests, fell on earth.
Bharadvaja said : You have been born from Pushkara. It follows that you are senior to him (Pushkara). But I doubt whether Brahman, your father's elder brother is also a senior.
That foremost of the Shini race, advancing through that sea of soldiers (i.e. army) all armed with swords and darts and horses, elephants and cars; saw his own troops covered in blood like those of an Asura host under attack by Indra himself.
Viśvāvasu said : You have truly and properly spoken what is auspicious for us, O Lord! May you be always blessed. Let your mind ever engage in pious acts by means of its understanding.
Thus struck in the forehead by that arrow, O king, that best of Brahmanas appeared like a deer with his horns.
Hear, O Yudhishthira the gifts that are made and received. The man who is endued with power should rescue a person from distress as he would save his own self; even such a twice-born one deserves all sorts of presents for knowledge by him has not been acquired in any way whatever. That Brahmana who can rescue another from suffering should be regarded like ourself.
Urged on by Time, he considers himself as having attained his end. Today all of them have been brought within the range of my arrows.'
Alas, all these Kauravas are now in this assembly afflicted with great sorrow. These men of high spirit do not act as they should; and beholding their miserable state I am much grieved.
In due order, the husband having killed his third wife who was of excellent behaviour and virtuous conduct went with those that have been reformed by vows in their lives as Vanaprasthas.
When darkness had covered the earth, all creatures fled in every direction. O monarch, many kings, abandoning their horses by hundreds and also themselves being seized with panic fear, ran away on all sides.
That impregnable Lankā, resembling the city of celestials itself, and abounding in elephants and horses, had been built by Ravana himself on high hills.
The king of the Yakshas, with his son and Shalva too who is the lord over earth. And Pragjyotisha's king Bhadra also that mighty car-warrior.
O beautiful one, tell me whose form is so agreeable and who comes from where? My heart has been captivated by her. I am in the power of my mind; there does not seem any other means (of winning it).
An expert in the use of weapons should know how to ascend and descend from a chariot, how to jump across an obstacle or a trench; he should also know well when it is proper to discharge his arrows as also their range.
Those creatures that are born of him, and those with whom he is connected by birth or marriage; when the king himself acts unjustly all these suffer misery.
Dushyanta said : O Shantkuntala, I do not know you have given birth to a son. A woman who is untruthful in her speech cannot be trusted by anybody. Your mother Menaka was devoid of any pity and she did treat your as an outcaste when the boy was born on Himalaya's breast like a garment taken off from his body.
Or, O Vibhatsu (Arjuna), do you stay with all your brothers. I shall fight this battle alone, holding a mace in my hand."
Angirasa said : He who makes a gift of an earthen lamp on the full-moon day of Karttika, having his hands smeared with Suvarcala paste (the ashes of Sarpi roots), succeeds in multiplying his progeny.
I wish, O Brahmana Rishi, in the presence of this assembly of ascetics to hear all these from you in full. There was a king on earth by name Yayati who resembled Indra himself and that monarch was famous for increasing Kuru race which he had inherited from his illustrious father Vibhavasu (Vasistha). He spread far and wide his fame as also became celebrated throughout the world. I am very much desirous of hearing everything about him both here and there.
O king, at that time your sons were filled with fear. They did not know how to fight the battle and they also lost their prowess in fighting.
That best of the celestials, that wielder of mace and discus Vasudeva with four arms is going before your car from affection for you.
No one in my dominions worships me with offerings or performs any other kind of worship. None, however, who has not read the Vedas and who does not observe vows can enter into a dispute about my sovereignty.
Alas, I have been deceived by you who are shrewd and of subtle intellect. Having placed confidence in you, I now experience this grief."
If the king does not wishfully follow their advice, he is sure to incur danger. Therefore, casting off all fear I shall speak what has been thought of by my mind."
Kokilas, Shatapatras, Chashas, Bhavas and Shukas, Sarasa birds and Mayuras are uttering their harsh notes.
Vaishampayana said When the sons of Pritha went out for their excursion, thousands and thousands of people living in the city came there with curiosity.
They say that the qualities of activity and inactivity are innate, or inherent. The doer is a permanent principle (or essence).
Sanjaya said As Jayadratha was thus speaking, that mighty armed Bhimasena, desirous of slaying him and acting with great speed advanced against your troops.
Lomasha said : O descendant of Bharata, in the vicinity of a lake lived Chyavana, son of Bhrigu. That effulgent and greatly powerful Rishi became motionless for many years at one spot on earth with his body rooted into it.
The kings then cast their looks upon Yudhishthira, "What will the righteous-minded one say?" They asked themselves in amazement.
Thereupon, O Bharata, that foremost of car-warriors viz., Vikarna sent against the latter fourteen Bhallas resembling snakes.
Your son Atikaya is a child, but very powerful. How can he have fallen down like an ant-hill without staying for any length of time?
O mighty-armed one, tell me all about this excellent Raksasa that you have seen; and how the monkeys were stricken with fear on seeing him.
By virtue of my curse, that girl has been deprived of her youth. I have by great penances obtained the forgiveness for it from him.
Before you had attained manhood, the four-fold objects of life were fixed by your father for his next world. Do not neglect those acts that are necessary in order to secure these ends; do not be guided by vanity alone.
O king, your sons then fled away in all directions on the death of Suta's son.
When the sound was thus produced, it gave great delight to all ears. Then did Bhima see the array of troops which had been made by Vishvakarman himself in that battle-field.
He who rules his subjects, both the town and country, in this way succeeds after enjoying many blessings of life hereafter attaining to heaven.
The deceitful Rākşasa, who was well acquainted with the prowess of Rama and whom he had slain before in this way having been thus frightened fled away.
And Vasishtha said, “O king, you have always shown me mercy. This is your good act towards me."
After this, the high-souled king performed a sacrifice according to due rites and seasons and with profuse presents.
Then Vidyunmali, while he was riding in his car, repeatedly struck Susena with arrows decked with gold and sent forth loud war-cries.
Lomasha said : The sun went round the great mountain, Meru, that is golden in colour.
O descendant of Bharata, the greatly powerful kings Shishupala and his son came with their followers. Rama also, Aniruddha as well as Kashinara all these were not at first willing but afterwards they came here.
Blood in large quantity gushed out from the wounds that Rāma inflicted on Khara's body, like water flowing down from a spring of a mountain. Thus wounded by arrows, he became senseless and being intoxicated with blood, rushed towards him (Rama) quickly.
Those dreadful ones entered the earth as if riding on cars made of Kroucha leaves. Entering into the ground, they sent out many flashes like those produced by thunder-bolts entering into a body of water (on Earth).
Neither the cow, nor Agni (fire), Varuna, Meša, Surya, horse, earth, Virāta or Yajña and Somas can be sold.
Taking her sons and daughters with her, his young wife thus spoke to the old Brahmana, “The husband is a deity of women. Do what I tell you; leaving this Falguni wood cut down that Kuḍdāla tree, if it brings about any good for Rama.”
And struck with the shafts decked in gold, he looked like a mass of dark clouds or the sun encircled by masses of clouds.
Sanjaya said When the hour of death was at hand, Arjuna became a destroyer of all creatures like Death himself.
O foremost of men, in bravery you are equal to Dhananjaya. Having surmounted Bhishma and Drona both experts in every kind of war.
As the clouds with rumbling thunder in rainy seasons range about, those warriors showering arrows and creating a din resembling that of chariots themselves sent up great roars.
Vaishampayana said : O king, thus addressed by him the highly illustrious Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira) replied saying-"O divine one, I desire to hear you speak on that excellent subject of creation.
The great Asura Madhu became the stream of Karna. He was very powerful, he had a dreadful nature and his understanding also was as terrible as himself; that best among men killed him in order to fulfil the vow made by Brahma. On account of this destruction all gods (including Indra) Danavas and human beings were filled with grief.
Whatever acts are done, whether good or bad by the body (in this world), mind follows them. Mind is like a stream flowing in all directions and accepting every kind of water that comes into it.
O Dhananjaya, why shall we be deprived of our wealth and children because you have followed the advice given by your wife?
And seeing that illustrious one, Rāma with his throat choked up by tears and addressing him as the exalted sir could not speak any longer.
Seeing the ocean, difficult of access like sky itself and then assembled together saying “What shall we do?”
The welfare of the state and virtue or vice are both in you. Be released from this great burden, seek for peace by renunciation.
Janamejaya said : O best of the Brahmanas, having killed that one who was like a bull among men (Bakrahaka), what did those sons of Pandu do next?
The following persons should not be fed at Shraddhas, as they are all wicked and hateful; viz., the Durvarna (the person who is born in an impure womb), Kunthi (one that has no hair on his head), Kushti (a leper), Mayavi (an enchanter or a magician) Kundagola (he whose tongue hangs down like a lump of flesh), Prayala (the man with three legs), Chandaprshta (the man having tail like a horse).
I am telling you all this in grief, O slayer of Madhu. You are the lord and master of everything animate as well as everything that is divine or human.
That man who makes gifts of a daughter in marriage and grants lands, he also acquires heaven by making liberal presents according to the ordinances.
What sin have you not committed in your asceticism for whom, though aged and unarmed having been slain by hundreds of keen arrows?
Krishna said : Having satisfied him (Yudhishthira) with the answers he asked, that best of Kurus and foremost of all men who had taken a vow for his whole life, that learned man of controlled senses answered these questions.
That fierce car-warrior then in that battle wounded Bhima with many arrows of depressed knots. Thereupon, greatly enraged, Bhimasena cut off those shafts shot by Karna before they reached him and thus saved himself from being pierced therewith.
Then the monkeys began to strike Kumbhakarņa with their nails, teeth and hands.
He saw the merchants engaged in commerce on his way. He then started with them for the sea,
Those two best of men, enveloping the welkin with their nets of arrows, began filling up all directions.
And being possessed by Yoga and the energy of Bharadvāja's intelligence, he having acquired a celestial form lived in that country.
Then leaving that body he entered the earth. And touching her with his feet, she began to bring forth various kinds of metals separately; and (there came out) from those bones fragrant odours, wood fit for sacrificial fires, splinters of crystal, iron, flesh, gold, blood, yellow bile, phlegm, fat, marrow, gall-stone, and bone, sinews, hair, nails, teeth, urine, perspiration, water from head, brain matter, and semen.
Rāma, speedily proceeding in the direction of Badarīpaćana (Badari) having his body anointed with sandal paste and attended by all creatures.
Yudhishthira said : O exalted one, tell me in detail the entire story truly as it happened. How was that Earth which had been lost by Indra for a hundred yojanas again restored? What sort of ceremony did he perform and how also could the goddess Shiva restore her so quickly when she had become barren with all fruits ceasing to grow on account of that loss of a hundred yoyanas? By whose power were those lost yojanas recovered? In what way did Mahadeva show his great prowess? I wish to hear you describe fully this incident, 0 best among twice-born persons; you are my refuge (in learning).
And the monkey-host, desirous of victory, having ranged itself in battle array against the dreadful Raksasa forces.
O descendant of Bharata, all these instruments and many others played by the highly happy learned men.
I see a great flame before me and it does not give any pain. Like the cold of winter, this fire is fixed on my finger-tips.”
The five elements are sky, wind, light, water and earth; the fifth element is consciousness of existence or non-existence. And time also which is a universal attribute exists in all creatures.
What is the matter? Why are you going away from here without fighting with them (the Pandavas)? This is not befitting a hero of Vrishni race.
You praise human desires, pleasures and wealth. Those that are devoid of them attain to a very high place in the next world.
What shall I do now? This is the time for me, when these Rakşasas may cause my destruction.
I will go where king Jayadratha is. O monarch, that one shall be my refuge today."
O king, the sons of Dhritarashtra thus slaughtered by Bhima fled away from battle. And then all those warriors who had been stationed on every side in that field gathered around Karna.
Beholding the mighty Bhima in his place, your son ran after him on various ways.
Hearing these words, Rāma said to Sugrīva:-What was the cause of enmity? I wish you should tell me everything.
You are my preceptor, or you are the lord of all creatures. All men regard me as your slave and no other king but yourself.
And on each tree I saw Rāma clad in black deer-skin, with the bow drawn (to his ear), like Ananta holding a noose.
We will go with the Panchalas, if you wish. O hero! it shall be a novel and delightful sight (for us).
O best of the Bharata race, having met together in battle and then being made friends with each other through the favour of that ascetic (the Rishi), those Kshatriyas have been deprived of their manliness.
O Hrishikesha, do you order the horses towards that host of Samsaptakas. I think they will not be able to face this battle if saved."
Having established his son, why should Sugriva maintain me who am not a member of the royal family and have no virtues?
I consider Fate superior; and prowess useless, since when I know that defeat and destruction are the fruits of battle.
That intelligent Gandharva king, who is known as Dhritarashtra. He has taken birth in the world of men and he will be your husband."
The wicked man becomes the companion of a good one, and the latter turns out an evil person. Friends become enemies; even friends turn out bad in character.
The wise man who wishes for his own welfare should take the vow of silence, observe salutation with folded hands and touch feet.
Vaishampayana said : Having heard these words of Dhritarashtra, Bhimasena was filled with anger. He then spoke in a sad hearted voice "This is the fate which awaits all sons of Pandu."
How can a wise man speak harsh words, sitting down, and without the help of any provocation?
At the command of Janaka, those messengers without beasts (of burden), having travelled for three days in succession came into Ayodhyā.
And delighted birds, with white feathers and wings ruffled up, drink the cool water falling from clouds on leaves in pure drops, given by Indra.
Having given Hanumān the gem, Sītā said:-I have known that this is what Rama actually does.
Seeing the cow come with a mild and untroubled heart, he spoke in reply with humility.
He, who is contented with what he has and who eats only when hungry, becomes happy if he acts according to the dictates of his own soul.
O mighty monarch, the Purus were always engaged in doing good deeds; it is therefore not fit for you who are born of them.
All that is known by the learned in all branches of learning, depends on the Vedas. In it are established all those things which exist and do not exist (in this world).
Thereupon Rāma said these sweet and religious words, fraught with benefit to the heroes. O foremost of kings! I have heard from those high-souled ascetics who were dwelling in Kurukshetra, that place is holy, purifying like heaven itself, frequented by gods and saints as well as Brahmanas of lofty souls.
In the vast Badari forest, O slayer of Madhu, a person with one leg ate nothing for hundred years.
Having come up behind him, he killed with six arrows the steeds of his charioteer that were fleet as wind and that had their bodies covered all over with gold.
Humble, self-controlled and having his senses under restraint that hero went to heaven by the help of his own energy.
O descendant of the Raghu race, that wind-god's son soon covered all directions with his swift horses and began to destroy them.
That bird, the crow, having got her (the deer) was roaring in delight and flying from tree to tree.
The very thought that he could not be killed was marvellous. When his weapon failed, I became filled with wonder.
Whether one is a house-holder or whether he has not attained the age of puberty, and whether be is old in years; as fruits ripen on trees so you should tell me.
The pleasure that a son takes in pleasing his father is the same as which the lord of creatures derives from being pleased by him. He who pleases his mother obtains the respect and honour due from all creatures, while he whose worship others seek is considered as adored by Brahman himself. All virtues are acquired by those men only for whom these three (i.e., parents) are always revered; but all their acts become fruitless if they disregard any one of them.
Dhritarashtra said : When the king had thus spoken to Yudhisthira, Vyasa, son of Satyavati came there and spoke these words.
Who is there who, being asked by a Brahmana learned in the Vedas and Vedic sciences about this earth which has no measure or end on any side of it, would tell him that she was full of both celestials and human beings?
You have been freed from all your sins. I shall now tell you what the duties of religion are."
Bheema, the son of Pandu and the most powerful hero in battle was thus ordered by his preceptor. Thereupon Vrikodara with the permission of his preceptor said-"Go! Go!"
O king, the heroic Ashvatthaman then placed those two sons of his with his brothers.
Some wise men say that acts which are attended with faults should be abandoned. Others, again hold that sacrifice and charity and asceticism form the three great works of virtue; these also should not be given up.
Then that great bowman, Drona, the foremost of all wielders of weapons, waxing wroth and quickly piercing Shini's son with ten shafts.
Each of these kings thinks himself competent against the Pandavas; let not your fears then, O queen, be any longer.
I wish, if possible, to see that dear one of mine in this charming place frequented by elephants and deer.
O monarch, all the kings presented wealth for his sacrifice; and many Brahmanas also came there.
O lord of Sachi, a first class animal may be found even in an empty house among cows or asses or horses.
Shalya said I will do what you have told me and also whatever else, in my power, that may be useful for your success.
From the contact of feet with water, from diseases and their symptoms and also for curing them by medicines or otherwise.
He who worships Padmanabha on the twelfth day of Ashvina, will surely obtain a thousand kine along with their calves.
The daughter of king Janaka was endowed with matchless beauty and her eyes were like lotus-petals. There is no other lady in the celestials or Yakshas who can compare with her (in this respect).
They who desire to acquire heaven quickly, should observe the vow of celibacy and perform many sacrifices with Dakshinas (gifts), in which Shrutis or Vedic hymns are recited.
And that one of unguessed strength, burnt by the fire which had been produced. Then those two great warriors Keshava and Arjuna freed themselves from their fetters.
All the kings saw his eyes contracted into three lines and with their eyebrows knit in a frown. He then turned up again his third eye, like Ganga flowing through her three channels.
Narada said You two are the most liberal of men, therefore let one amongst you go (to heaven) without making any distinction. Having said this he became silent. Hearing these words Shibi went round him and made a path for him with many acts of merit and praised him highly; then he set out.
If the king lives up to his duties, he is sure to attain divine status. But if he deviates from them and behaves improperly, then surely goes down into hell.
You have, O son of Pritha, experienced great happiness in the enjoyment of your kingdom. Such a state cannot be permanent. When it is over you will meet with misery.
Beholding Drona thus being devoured in battle by Satyajit, the Panchala prince Vrikodara pierced him with hundreds of sharp arrows.
Are you stupefied? Why do you grieve, O fool! In as much as grieving for yourself also, you shall attain the same end.
And then the kings, with their counsellors and ministers, flying away from all sides in consequence of being routed by Karna who was endued with great prowess, were slain (by him).
How can I find a bridge? There is no boat. Where shall we cross over the ocean, thinking of which this excellent idea has come into my mind.
I am peaceful, self-controlled and of a benevolent disposition; but the gods think that I have no strength.
O foremost of men, this was preordained; therefore you should not grieve. Victory also rests with him who observes virtue (in the form prescribed by religion).
That foremost of the Rakshasas, that one having thousand arms and resembling a mountain in appearance looked beautiful like a hill covered with caves.
Taking up a shield, that was decked with thousand moons and stars in battle-field the powerful hero cut off (with his sword) Khattwa's head.
The man who having become fully concentrated at the rising of the sun reads this (hymn), acquires sons, wives and riches in abundance. He also becomes capable of remembering his birth and he attains to wisdom and intelligence.
And the sun, moon and stars which are so cruel in his body; these become mild by his being mild.
Seeing that celestial messenger of disagreeable odour, he said “What is the business for which we have been sent here?
He did not see the snake lying there, but coiled up in a triangular form. It was then that death arrived at him with speed and he died as soon as his foot touched it.
Thus commanded by Rāma, those swift messengers went speedily and lived in the forest; but they did not make any noise.
I shall be defeated in battle by the son of Pandu. Then do you, O sire, slay my maternal uncle and Bhimasena endued with great strength; if we succeed in defeating them (in this engagement), then shall all our foes be conquered."
The foremost of the gods, who is at one with Brahma and all the celestials cannot overcome this Urvashi in her anger. All religious rites connected with Brahmanas will cease if they are destroyed."
Hearing the words of Bharata, ever patient and always strong in mind, Lakshmana stood up, leaving his golden seat. And Satrughna said with folded hands; “O descendant of Raghu! O mighty armed one! You have done your duty perfectly. Before this you had been living here for keeping empty Dhrtarashtra's kingdom safe (from enemies). Being distressed at heart on account of Arjuna's coming back I am ready now to go wherever he likes."
When they had thus spoken about the excellent city of Varanavata, O king, an idea then occurred in their mind.
The ear, the skin, the eyes and the tongue are also called organs of knowledge. So too, the nose, the mind, the two feet, digestion and excretion, speech and action.
Therefore have we appointed hundreds and thousands of Daityas, Rakshasas as your foes in this battle.
He is better than Indra himself. And that highly effulgent son of Vasudeva, armed with the Gandiva and having white horses yoked at his chariot, what will he do?
O you well-versed in the precepts of virtue, I shall stop this (war) which is not according to our desire and it has been undertaken for the sake of Rajasuya.
Without that hero, the son of Vasudeva I am unable to live. Having heard of Vishnu's death my own sight has become dimmed."
The Jackal said : You have tried many a time in the forest of killing this tiger. He is young, has great swiftness and is very wise; you cannot kill him! When he sleeps we will eat up his feet, then let the tiger take them with pleasure. Then all of us shall be happy.”
There are four kinds of birth, viz., terrestrial births and celestial births; those born from eggs or seeds (i.e. plants) as well as the offspring which spring up without any parentage?
Thereupon, having cut off the bow of Kripa and slain his horses with arrows, that son of Pandu (Dhananjaya) then severed into pieces that most dreadful bow of Ashvatthaman.
Thereupon, O best of the Bharata race, having seen each other entertained, those dwellers in woods sat down around him.
When the king of Kuru thought of his wicked son, then did that ruler of earth think of Bhima.
The great serpent of virulent poison, having the complexion of fire and blazing like a burning brand, came out from there. That one destroyed everything in this world-the celestials, Asuras and men.
One who is handsome, of fair complexion and good voice; one that has control over his senses; one who is free from malice, a man belonging to a high caste, one possessing all accomplishments.
The high-souled and truthful ascetics, who have knowledge of the truth say that one is gifted with merit when he acquires virtue through his own efforts; on the other hand, if a person acquires virtue without any exertion on his part, then it is said by them to be an instance of acquiring virtue in consequence of being born in a particular order.
Vaishampayana said : Thereupon king Yudhishthira, with humility asked the son of Shantanu (Bhishma) about various topics on gifts.
Beholding Bhishma, that foremost of the Kurus thus engaged in his own duties and religious observances according to law, the Rishi became highly pleased.
And being engaged in performing various sacrifices, Vibhīşaņa became the servant of those Rşis having great asceticism. That mighty one also commanded many excellent ministers and followers for assisting his gracious high-souled ancestors among kings.'
And the mighty arrows of Drona began to fly about like flashes of lightning.
He then made circles on all sides, and in front of him. Thus did he make the Pandavas fight with those that were behind them like Indra's car when it fought for victory over the Asuras at a time gone by.
Nala knew his own self, and the sequel of what had happened to him. He never mentioned any symptoms (of that knowledge).
As air, blowing without any interruption and producing no pleasure or pain to the living creatures in this world, goes from tree to trees, hill after hills, forest into forests,
Like a wooden elephant or one made of leather, like an old and lean horse, as the field without cultivation is useless so is your study if you are not careful in it. A king who does not protect his subjects is good for nothing; even clouds that do not pour rain on ground fall down from heaven without any use.
One should not be angry with his ministers, or especially women. He who is careful of these four (viz., a mountain, an uneven place, a difficult fortress and elephants) can never fall into any difficulty; nor also he that always observes the rules of domestic life. A man should avoid pride arrogance and anger.
Dhritarashtra said What is the use of my life, which has been reduced by you (Yudhishthira) into a heap of ashes?
Janamejaya said : O son of Shonaka, when one is not repenting for his sins and is losing his virtue and being pleased with the adoration offered by others, he should be treated in this way.
Then, O king, beholding the monarch deprived of all his energy and fallen (on earth), that voice resembling the roar of thunder checked Bhima. And he then fled away from battle out of fear.
Coming up in haste, like an enraged snake breathing forth his poison at a distance of two cubits from the person who had annoyed him.
The feet are mine, the vital air is also mine; and so too is my sense of touch. And that which is called the five senses by me, all belong to myself
You are the Creator of all creatures, O slayer of enemies; therefore that saying which you have said must be listened by me with respect.
Saying this, the Kuru prince addressed king Yudhishthira. “Be blessed you and also your mother. Listen to me what I have to say.”
Again and again desirous of doing what was agreeable (to the son of Drona) they set up three tents for Huta, in as many places.
The five elements cannot be found in the body of a man who is senseless and motionless, or one whose breath has been stopped.
Krishna said The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Karna and Durmashana, as also that of those wicked-minded Shalva's son Shakuni.
People will only do a little cultivation, and will give the rest of their time in rearing horses. They shall yoke three or four oxen with one plough; they will also employ many human beings on each farm for clearing it from all its thorns.
Surely, one is liberated by giving away Kapila. Therefore should a man give his daughter adorned with ornaments to the twice-born ones.
O Lakşmaņa, without you my residence in this forest is intolerable. See how she, impelled by desire and having a body like that of an animal, returns towards her husband (Rāvaņa).
You cannot with your mind resist the mandate of Rāma, the younger brother of king Dasaratha. The mind is subject to human power; and therefore know you not the might (of that monarch), having for his charioteer Sītăsirōhān, like to Indra himself.
The mighty-armed one saluted them and they too returned the greeting. Then he entered into that excellent mansion of his grandfather Bhishma, with Kunti at his side.
Thereupon, worked up with wrath he shot a huge and fearful mace decked with gold at the chariot of Vaikartana.
O monarch, that foremost of the Bharatas thus encompassed by those shafts looked like the moon surrounded by stars.
Hearing these words and consulting with his ministers, Bhishma resolved upon doing what Satyavati had approved.
Thus being mangled in battle with keen shafts of various kinds, they (the warriors) fled away from Arjuna on all sides.
Having gained knowledge and not knowing how to use it, they will perform deeds of their own accord when the end (of a Yuga) arrives.
O king, the high-souled and greatly energetic Vālmīki having used that weapon for a moment, was able himself to destroy it.
The whole of my disciples, with their wives and attendants, have been duly installed; they are all pure in conduct. They are highly pleased with me for having thus accepted them as pupils.
My beloved wife, of a sweet disposition and fair complexion has eyes resembling the petals of lotuses. Forsooth she shall die when I return from this expedition."
When the year had passed away, Śarmisţhă beheld her youth returning. And she began to reflect as to when spring would arrive.
The celestials know him for a Brahmana, who is without any anxiety or exertion; and who has no inclination for saluting others.
Their encounter was so dreadful that the hairs of all those creatures, including men and birds stood on their end. It resembled in its effect what had taken place between the Daityas with Indra (in days gone by).
Like a cloud drinking down the rain, that foe of Indra drank up all those arrows with his person; and then he again shot at Rāma's force an iron mace endowed with great impetuosity.
As he rushed towards him, the heroic Sahadeva severed with a Bhalla his head, O king.
The Supreme Being said By My favour, you shall be born among men and also amongst the celestials and Gandharvas. You will have immeasurable strength; therefore shall you become Narayana (or Vishnu).
O lord of the earth, do you also act in a similar way and by performing your duty protect this earth; then shall you attain heaven.
The powerful king of the Madras, eager for battle (with Bhimasena), went towards him like an elephant going in search of another one.
Parvata said : Let the man who has taken away your Pushkara be sent into exile, let him go with a cart-load of stones and let an ass drag his load for making money.
Shalya said Look, O son of Pandu! Karna has become very angry with you. He has been cherishing his wrath for a long time and now he is anxious to let it loose on your person.
Having cut off those arrows with his sharp shafts, the slayer of hostile heroes-Lakşmaņa-went on drawing a whetted arrow that blazed in its own effulgence.
In all great creatures there are the five senses, their objects and those organs which perceive them. The mind follows the understanding; reason is attached to what is natural (to the individual).
The Grandsire said : O best of the Tilaka race, go with Sunda and Upasundha. Ask them in a pleasing way for permission to live here.
Beholding the enemy advance, that hero, the son of Shini and conqueror of hostile cities said smilingly to his charioteer.
Does the king Dhritarashtra, along with his sons disregard all transgressions of Brahmanas? And does he always disregards their conduct and habits.
You shall, O king, have no share in the fruits of that sacrifice which you do not perform. For those whose kings celebrate Ashvamedha sacrifices with profuse presents (to their subjects)
The stars in the sky have attained immortality through contentment, according to Vedic texts.
What you say, O best of monkeys, is perfectly true. There is no one equal in strength to me or who has gone before me and there will be none after me.
Thus did that mighty bowman get his arms and pay the price. Accompanied by Bhima, he stood there like a mountain with its summit covered over with clouds.
That scorcher of foes, O king, by means of his car-fighting and other stratagems which are highly efficacious for creating confusion in the ranks of one's enemies and stupefying them.
This excellent Draupadi, who is well-behaved and worthy of praise will save you all like Savitri the wife of Satyavana.
No human being will do me any good. Nor is there anyone who can be dearer than him (Rama) on earth."
Death in battle is pleasant; let those that are engaged in the duties of their order, encounter it. He who dies in battle knows no misery after death and attains immortality thereafter."
Seeing his army fatigued and depressed, seeing that the brothers of Ravana had been killed in battle, all endowed with prowess equal to Indra's; beholding also their kinsmen slaughtered in fight; being enraged at those two excellent Rakshasas who were mad for war, that one gifted with great energy-possessed of Brahma Datta-like power, resembling a mountain in size-and proud of having vanquished both gods and Asuras.
The army of the Sindhus is in front and that of Drona at its rear; for they are numerous, O foremost of men, even Indra himself would be oppressed by them.
For this, never regard wealth as a good thing; and never blame any one. Life is unstable here in this world.
Those warriors, delighted with the success of their mission and praising one another loudly, went towards Partha. And those heroes also praised Karna greatly. Seeing that Arjuna's chariot was overturned on account of his arrows being shot off by Karna, they all uttered loud shouts in joy; some clasped each other and spoke thus:-'Behold! Karna has made Pritha's son fall from his car!'
You are, O Tāraka's son, certainly stronger than your sire in battle; and like to our father you can surely hold the monkey kingdom.
Hearing his well-considered words, that monkey having the wind for his soul became exceedingly glad. And Saumitri also reflecting upon them and considering it a fit opportunity of obtaining victory (through their aid), sought friendship with those monkeys.
That which is given by a person, and that with which he receives back what has been given him are both without beginning. They give only to themselves; they receive from themselves. There is no one else than the Soul in this world who can act thus. Do you always think of these facts; do not allow your mind to dwell on anything different.
Twenty, ten and eight cars were yoked on his chariot. Many fearful bows also and golden and black arrows of the best quality.
The sovereignty of a kingdom is not sought by any one even in the smallest village. Dhritarashtra's sons, who are fully aware that their father had obtained his kingdom through unfair means and therefore they themselves will be deprived of it when death overtakes them. They were also sure that Partha was never vanquished in battle with all those efforts which they made to kill him;
And being vanquished by Savyasachin (Arjuna) in battle, what else is there for me now than death?
Having been thus addressed by Karna, the king of Madras (Shalya) sent him a large number of excellent white horses.
Those two, of great beauty and energy, engaged in battle with one another cut each other's limbs into pieces by means of their arrows.
Thus it is that if what has been done in the past be not known, then ignorance will lead one into great distress. O Sanjaya! this is a well-known duty of Kshatriyas (warriors) viz., that they should leave their clothes when going out for fight;
The celestials having bathed in those Tirthas have acquired great prosperity. O king of kings, you also with your younger brother shall acquire that same prosperity by bathing there.'
Knowing that the Pandavas had come there with a view of asking him, Lomasha who was versed in words said these words-"Listen O you sons of Pandu.
He is without decay and immortal. The knowledge of Him can be obtained either from the manifest or from the unmanifest objects, in this world. All things have emanated form him who has infinite attributes which are very subtle; he himself having all those qualities for his basis.
And they shall, without feeling any pain destroy the trees and gardens in this world; there is no doubt about it.
For the purpose of spreading abroad what her husband had done, that foremost of women was commanded by him (Indrajit) and she replied thus to king Ravana.
And tell me also all that Arjuna did for the destruction of king Jayadratha, O Sanjaya; you are very well-informed in this matter.
That man, who always thinks of himself as the agent and not as an instrument in the hands of destiny, is a fool; for he never sees (the truth).
A king who is not learned cannot protect his subjects. O child, the burden of kingship is very heavy and it is difficult to discharge one's royal duties.
Rāma, I am old; and my life is long. And desired objects have been enjoyed by me in abundance of food like that which a sacrifice requires for the performance thereof.
When the fire had been extinguished, all the celestials with Vasava became greatly anxious for its reappearance.
And having destroyed Tripura in the sky, Mahesvara (Shiva), O sire, has taken up his abode among those thousand Pandava princes.
Having heard the words of my messenger, who has faith in them and is endued with knowledge of duty, all those celestials that are stationed on high have adored me.
Smell is the element of earth, air (or wind) has been considered as its deity. The three others are also known in their respective elements and deities.
O foremost of kings, in the Haihaya dynasty there were a hundred brave and unconquerable sons.
The Brahmanas said : O king, let not such a thought as is born in your heart on account of us. We will go and get our food ourselves without any help from you."
How did the son of Drona learn all weapons from that great bowman? What are those two learned Brahmana, who have been killed by what person.
Hothrava said : O lord, my daughter-in-law and the beloved princess of Kashi has waited here for Svayamvara with her two younger sisters.
This was not approved by my mother, and I did not obey her. Nor am I content with this (act of disobedience), nor do I accept that speech which she made on the subject."
And O Brahmana, thousands of Vrishni men with the Abhiras pursued by me were killed in those five rivers.
Seeing the Pandavas sleeping with their mother on the ground, she felt a great pity for them and began to weep.
You are ever engaged in the performance of pious rites; you have conquered your senses, and you are always ready for fighting with foes. Your affection is firm towards all the celestials and gods, O foremost of Rishis! And it has been due also to your faithfulness that I was able today to grant these boons (to my disciples).
Beholding that mighty Kumbhakarna advancing, the heroic lord of monkeys-Sugriva-rose up. And raising a huge mountain and hurling it at him with all his might he ran after that highly powerful (Kumhbkarņa).
Then like a lion rushing at an elephant, Ghatotkacha rushed furiously against the son of Drona and covered him with arrows shot from his bow drawn back up to its ear.
O you of expansive eyes, I have forgiven all that was said by you in anger and which had no love for me.
Kripa, Somadatta and the king of Valhika all sat down on their respective seats. They began adoring Janardana (Krishna).
Again did Angada, that foremost of monkeys, addressing those leading ones, said,-'All you are endowed with strength and energy; all have sprung from good families.
The Pandavas lived there with their wife Krishna (Draupadi), all of whom had acquired the merit that comes from a life of asceticism.
And when they will be united in one form, then your wish shall have been fulfilled. The clouds and the stars that are auspicious (to you),
If righteousness is destroyed, then the entire universe with mobile and immobile objects, all gods and celestial Rishis will certainly be lost.
Then, O foremost of the Bharata race, Parvata resembling a mass in sky and having no feet descended on me with great speed at my thigh.
Vaishampayana said Listen, O king of kings, 0 sinless one, as I tell you in detail what the Pandavas did having Vasudeva before them.
In Treta, the Vedas were mixed up with Yajnas and castes. Being thus obstructed by one another in Dvapara all of them are being destroyed.
Regaining consciousness, the exceedingly powerful Rakshasa lifted up his fist and threw it in jest. He then fell down senseless.
O descendant of Bharata, the Panchala prince with his troops and army was then routed by that powerful Drona. The son of Pandu could not act at all in consequence of fatigue which overpowered him (and made him sleep).
Beholding the great ascetic thus engaged in his pious works and adored by all, those servants of theirs who had been dismissed for their misbehaviour used every moment to insult him.
Bhima could not withstand his grief and became senseless. The king then, though he was angry with him, still did not drive away that best of men (Bhima).
The vast trees, torn up by the force of wind from their high summits and shaken like ropes with nooses at one end, looked more beautiful.
When the soul, with a cheerful heart and with its own light within it sees all creatures, then does that subtile essence of Brahma spread itself over everything.
O best of the twice-born, you will be afflicted with hunger and thirst. At that time your intelligence shall revive again.
The king, O monarch, cannot attain virtue and pleasure without wealth; nor can the world subsist by his death.
Remembering the old hostility of their race, those heroes having various forms and mighty prowess killed a jackal belonging to his family.
On the banks of Ganga on its northern side, O best among kings stands a city consisting entirely of Brahmanas and containing no Shudras. It is full of all kinds of wealth.
Then taking up a water pot, and cleansing his face with it by means of Pranayama (breathing exercises), he stood for some time in great purity. And then commencing the recitation of hymns.
Pride, arrogance, vanity and anger with rudeness are the characteristics of a person who is born in an inferior family.
With their senses controlled, and with all their limbs motionless, they sat there in deep contemplation. And having subjugated the mind by means of concentration on its own self (Atman),
The Self is born in her, therefore she gives birth. How can my husband be protected by me who am a mere wife?
Vaishampayana said : All the Kurus and their followers praised that speech of theirs. They then made a loud noise (of joy). The roaring sound was heard as far as Nila's country.
Look here, O Krishna! The poor creature is on his car and being duly initiated by the preceptors, he has started for his destination.
Having ascertained that you have been well disposed towards us and are free from all fear, I shall give the fire of this room.
Like the ocean swallowing all its waters in a torrent. Then, like that serpent (Shesha) of great energy and smiling, Drona's son cut-off those arrows resembling snakes with his own shafts.
Then, having gone to Bhrigu's cave and lived there for some time in asceticism, I saw a Brahmana on the way.
The son of Vaivasvata (Yama) takes away the sinful acts which are stored in his heart. He who is satisfied with all his actions, that Kshetrajna (consciousness), lives within him as a witness.
Without reflecting for a moment on Nandi's words, that one of great strength-Dasanan-went up the hill and said.
Non-injury, truth, absence of anger or malice in heart and mind, renunciation, peacefulness, sincerity towards all creatures, mercy for every living being, lack of covetousness, mildness, modesty, freedom from fickleness.
O giver of honours, you are protected by your armour and ear-rings; know therefore that in battle you shall be invulnerable.
Narada said : Having promised thus and saluted the Grandsire, she (Agni) went round all those celestials in a circle.
Thereupon, renouncing his monkey form, Hanumānthe son of Maruta assumed the guise of a mendicant with an understanding that was deceitful.
When the charioteer of Satyaki was slain, all became greatly agitated and nothing could be seen.
Having formerly given away in charity many heaps of provisions, equaling mountains and also several articles for use at meals, Sumanyu's soul has gone up to heaven.
Galava said : O king, there lives the powerful lord of Kashi and a great hero known by name Divodasa. He is also called Bhimasena, the ruler of men.
He is the refuge of all our enemies, who have been slain in battle; he is also a great delighter and bestower of happiness on us by bringing with him from foreign lands many rich presents.
Beholding those fierce and mighty warriors, O Bharata, slain by Bhimasena the king Duryodhana thus spoke to his troops. “O you best of the race of Bharatas! Commanding all your soldiers as well as that mighty bowman (Drona) command also my brothers in battle saying "Bhima has been killed.”
It appeared like the abode of celestials. O best among Bharata's race, having got Krishna for his comrade and being then looked upon as an equilant of Indra himself by virtue of his meeting with Shakra (Arjuna) that king of mountains entered a beautiful palace which was full of rooms; Govinda too accompanied by Satyaki went into their respective palaces in high spirits after returning from exile lasting so long on account of difficulties they had encountered while fighting against Danavas just as Vasava did when he returned victorious over them. The descendants of Bhoja, Vrishni and Andhaka all followed that illustrious descendant of Yadu dynasty as if following him were as much easy as going to see Shatkartuva.
Seeing that dreadful and terrible fight, your sons as well as the warriors of yours became filled with grief and ran away in all directions.
And, O king of the Nishadhas, I will go there in search of my own lost foot-prints. There shall I find you again and regain that supreme good which is so much sought after by all creatures."
Thereat the prince, waxing wroth and uttering roars like a lion, pierced Drona in that mighty battle on his breast with an arrow.
Birth and death, O king are not physical for those who have knowledge. By sacrifices, penances, observance of vows, the performance of rites and by asceticism they acquire heaven but fall on earth from it again.
The men who have made charity their chief object, attain happiness in this world and prosperity hereafter. They are always careful not to hurt the feelings of others or give them pain; they do good even to those whom it is difficult for them to please; when associated with virtuous persons they show a great deal of strength (of mind); seeing that all things belong to God, they consider what will be beneficial to themselves as well as to other people.
In this race of the high-souled Iksvākus, will be born Rama-the son of Dasaratha. He shall deprive you of your life."
O king of kings, they are each visited by these persons (viz., the five), when a man is seized with grief and becomes foolish.
O thousand eyed one, you are incapable of bearing this burden for a long time; but by practising virtue and being contented with what is sufficient I am able still to bear it. How then can I cast off my burden today? Hearing these words of his son which were spoken in so mild accents the righteous-minded chastiser of Paka (Indra) was pleased with him.
O lord of kings, Samvarta, the son of Krishna, thus advancing against Vrihadbala. The heroic and powerful prince stood in his chariot checking his enemy's progress.
O the best of kings, you have conquered me by your own virtues. Therefore with due regard for yourself and without despising any one else, act as a conqueror.”
Today let your head with flaming ear-rings be cut off by my arrows and then let the vultures devour it into pieces, covered as it will lie in blood.
Bhishma said Hear from me, in separate chapters the Shraddhas that Yama had laid down for every constellation.
If I am unworthy of being spoken with, then do you both declare that we shall conquer the Pandavas in battle. Hearing these words uttered by yourselves and agreeing with them, yet I will not destroy this host of warriors (by my own) destructive weapons."
Or this monkey may attain liberation without being taken by the Asuras, or men; if he be really so (i.e., a Raksasa).
And that weapon which shall be taken up by a man of tranquil soul for engaging in conflict, will turn into ashes and return back to your hands.
When night was over, the great ascetic Vishvamitra having taken leave of those two kings set out for Utataraparva.
After the elephants had thus fallen down, they began to fall like hills struck with a thunder-bolt.
Desirous of victory, they in that battle rushed against Kunti's son and began to resist him with arrows shot from the bowstrings.
I wish, O best of mountains, that you may grant me the permission to go any where in my journey.
And that mighty monkey leaped up on the Vajradansta, as also on Shuka of great energy and the intelligent Sāraņa.
The high-souled Rāma, having vowed a mighty vow and possessed of great energy, was greatly comforted by that incident. And he began to work up his wrath (against Dasagrīva).
And in Prabhāsa was born the hero who made one's hair stand on end; these high-souled heroes, having lions for their pride and possessed of great strength.
Thereupon, Rāma having his heart set on the affair and desirous of carrying it into execution, spoke thus in a friendly way with Saumitri as if addressing him who is like Brahma himself among celestials.
He who lives with the wives of others, he that has sexual intercourse with a widow and he that appropriates Brahmanical property are all equally guilty.
Who is there that can be offended by a Brahmana like me? The son of the Rishi, Drona's disciple and my preceptor.
Having heard that Arjuna was well and having seen him return, Yudhishthira became very much delighted.
Our mighty car-warriors, O son of Kunti, being assailed with these showers and checked by me (in battle), are not staying on the field.
Vaishampayana said : Hearing that the son of Pritha had gone to Indra's heaven, the king (Yudhishthira) asked Sanjaya these words from Brihaspati.
And there at the summit of Mount Mainaka, I had kept a beautiful and excellent golden vessel filled with ambrosia for those Asuras who were engaged in searching after it.
Although your brother Vibhīşana spoke words fraught with profit, yet you saw him in a state of stupefaction at the idea that his life would be taken away by means of poison.
Thus deprived of his ears and nose, Kumbhakarna was rent open by Sugriva's monkeys. And he began to drink blood (from the ground).
The ascetics say that emancipation is difficult of attainment. Those who have been liberated should be adored by you and the world also, together with war for this reason I bow down my head to those great Rishis (the Pandavas).
He, who having honoured the priests and preceptors with presents of gold, honours them not when they come back for more, is said to be a king of righteous deeds.
Then instructing the gatekeepers of his city, Uttara said 'I shall myself go there' and ordered the counsellors.
He who is desirous of testing the strength (of his enemy), should be told truly about it. Having consulted with your ministers, you should cheerfully tell him what really exists in fact.
O foremost of men, a person who would slay the man that is not given up by his anger with Brahma weapons cannot be slain in any way.
Today I shall come back with Rāma, Sugriva and Lakşmana having slain the monkey army.
In front of the king went a messenger of the gods, and behind him marched other royal messengers. They had chosen an evil road which was difficult for them to pass through on account of their sinful acts.
In battle, O monarch, these monkeys, resembling the son of Ailavaņa in warfare and capable of accomplishing their purposes speedily (in conflict), descended from Mount Uttara furnished with sharp teeth.
Then eight hundred young and white robed youths bathed in the river, their vessels being made of gold.
Having performed his morning devotions and having circumambulated the fire, he stood in front of Yudhishthira with folded hands.
His wrath was under control, his mind tranquil. He had given up wealth and the desire for riches; he had no quarrels with any one; having renounced all possessions he wandered about like a mendicant whose belly is empty (but who has not lost heart).
Thus spoken by the god, Arjuna was filled with anger. Remembering what had happened before, Dhananjaya became highly wrathful.
Then Bhimasena struck Duryodhana on the flank. Overwhelmed by that blow, he fell down with his thighs broken in pieces and lay weltering in blood all over the field of battle
They say that faith is a mark of virtue. I have thus described the path (of religion) to you, as shown by the wise men and virtuous men in their acts which are like bridges over an ocean of Religion.
Having divided the crime of Brahmanicide among trees and rivers, mountains and earths and women.
O Brahmanas, some men dig out earth. Some others cut down the reeds in a lake and they bring them back home.
All your warriors are heroes and all of them are well-acquainted with the art of war. And they are learned in the Vedas, versed in every branch of learning,
Bhimasena also, at the command of Yudhishthira, sells many kinds of flesh and other viands which he has taken from fish.
When the creature, by virtue of his knowledge, renounces ignorance which is born from Ignorance and when he then becomes a Brahma (the eternal), does that Knowledge shine forth.
Seeing the arrow furnished with fire and lighted by solar rays, that ranger of night discharged a dreadful shaft.
Seeing his energy thus exhausted, Agni went to the sacred mansion of Brahman, which is always honoured by all.
Vaishampayana said : Having thus spoken, that illustrious and great-grandfather of the Kurus again spoke to Dhritarashtra.
When the great ocean was thus being dried up, a dreadful commotion began. All the celestials and all Rishis of ascetic wealth were highly excited with anger. Alarums sounded throughout the three regions and heaven as well as earth appeared like one universal cry.
And those shafts, with their heads and wings broken by that huge-armed one wearing a coat of mail decked in the jewelled Vajra (thunderbolt), all fell down on earth.
For eighteen years, the Savitri had observed this vow. On completing her eighteenth year she became pleased with herself and began to be satisfied.
The fear of those, who are destitute of arms or whose weapons have been taken away from them is always dispelled. Fear itself becomes ineffective when it cannot produce its effect on the object that has caused it.
O king, innumerable heroic lords of the world were seen flying away like ordinary men.
Having performed the ceremony with a lotus, and having made over two hundred of them in exchange for those who had been given by king Dhritarashtra.
And with their hearts broken and deprived of life, they fell down on the earth like trees cut at their roots.
Hearing these words, which were accompanied by anger (of Rama), Kaikeyi, who was twice as angry as the king himself said.
In a moment the battle between them was over. Your son, pierced with hundreds of shafts by his adversary, then turned away from him.
Tell me what Dhananjaya, that foremost of car-warriors did and also tell me where he is now. From this I shall learn the cause of our greatest fear from Vrikodara my brother."
The son of Indra, that wind-god, was killed by the king of gods himself in obedience to Rahu's behest.
O son of Kunti, even if they are fleet as thought themselves; yet will not be able to escape from us. For this reason we have always depended on the strength of others.
And, O great king, in consequence of the darkness and especially on account of the dust raised by that army I could not see anything; nor did we distinguish between what was good or evil.
This Vasudeva of great prowess is holding in his hands the conch and mace; he rides on these white horses of wind-like fleetness.
Having thus addressed his beloved queen, the royal sage Dushyanta began to adore her with many articles of apparel and food.
With their bodies pierced with arrows and the hair standing on end, those two warriors looked exceedingly beautiful in that mighty battle.
Then rushing upon Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, that scion of Radha's race touched his neck with those parts of his body which are considered as auspicious and also touching it again and again began forcibly to seize him. Remembering Kunti's words he thought of putting an end to himself by laying hold of another person (Yudhisthira).
Thereupon that best of men (Yudhishthira) taking the maiden of sweet smile, did not go back to his own city on a golden car.
The preceptor should not be asked by an intelligent person what he ought or ought not do. By considering the time and place, one may know when it is proper for him to fight.'
The fruit of Yoga is great, for one who has attained it may go anywhere he likes.
Beholding the car-places made empty by Satvata and Arjuna, as also seeing many slain warriors lying dead on the field of battle, I think my sons are very sorry.
When the son of Sini, O sire, had been thus comforted by Sahadeva; then with a smile did the prince (Yudhishthira) speak these words.
Having been thus addressed by his eldest brother, the younger one said nothing more. His words were unrighteous and would lead him away from heaven.
Then, O king, seeing the net spread before him and having pierced it with his arrows I hurled at them twelve dreadful lances.
Having been sent by thirty hells, he lives in his own abode. He regards the observance of religious duties as a means for attaining heaven and he is vain about his learning (in the scriptures). As an example of this, you may see that sinner who has become lean like a dog with its coat shorn off.
Their armour and shields are rent asunder; their bows, swords, darts and lances have been shattered. And deprived of arms and armours, they lie prostrate on the field, helpless and in great distress.
Hearing these words of Kumbhakarna, he (Rāma) suddenly broke up the mountain and hurled it at him. And that broken mass resembling a thunderbolt or a meteor fell upon Kumgbha karna's breast.
Bharata, with joined hands said O exalted Rishi, I have not fled from the field out of fear for you.
In particular, I observe that the present year is of five seasons. For purging this sin (of killing a Brahmana) for which my soul has become so wicked-minded as not to act up to it with due regard and care, I am ready at all times to bear any sort of sufferings.
Thus, O best of the Bharata race did I relate everything about that foremost of Brahmanas and his high deeds on being asked by Rukmini's son.
O monkey, those eight thousand Rakshasas named Kinkaras are always engaged in serving me and protecting my palace.
Thus addressed by Bharata, the king's great-grandfather spoke these graceful words with bowing his head towards Rāghava.
They say that a gift of earth ten times over returns in the next world with interest. The giver obtains wealth and food for his dependents. That which is given away never becomes exhausted, but increases like water.
These two are the highest regions, and these do all creatures worship. What deity should a wise man offer oblations of libations?
As he was falling, Vasava came forward and received him. The lord of all boons, ever engaged in the welfare of all creatures,
Those heroes, assembled together with Drona at their head, proceeded against the Pandavas.
And if he takes away the Viighas, that is what remains after a sacrifice has been performed. If however he does not take it away and leaves it on the ground, then whatever remains of his offerings becomes Amrita (nectar).
O king of Vindhya, for the crime that he had committed with his sister in a form which was not proper (i.e. assuming an animal's shape) this hill came under the control and jurisdiction of Brahmarshis; hence it is called Dandaka forest from then onwards.
O subduer of foes, tell me what these five brothers and Dhrishtadyumna as also Satyaki are capable of doing. And the seven men that constitute their army, 0 king; and those who follow them in battle with whom they possess no equal among us, viz., Bhishma and Drona and Kripacharya and others (of theirs).
While you were looking on, O Bhima, the daughter of Subala resembling a withering banana tree or an unchaste woman (and) deprived of her wealth at dice-play by Dushasana. From that moment I knew my race had been conquered.
And, O king, the high-souled Vaivasvata offered a Vedi of ten Yojanas in length and nine in width.
Kunti, the daughter of Bhoja and all other ladies in the palace were sent for by Vasanti who was staying with her father. They (the ladies) came into the inner apartments escorted by Vasanty and Kuntibhoja.
The Danavas, who were all expert in fighting and had lost their lives on the field of battle. Those pious celestials, however, proceeded towards the sea with its currents and lakes. By penances by sacrifices and gifts, O son of Pandu they obtained liberation from sin and also acquired great merit. They thus freed themselves from every evil deed as well as from all sinful acts.
Thereupon the handsome and powerful monkey Angada, with his mace destroyed that beautiful car of (Indrajita) having horses and charioteer.
Then the divine voice said, "O twiceborn one, I shall give you this Sarasvati which has become your body.
It is not possible for one who has no control over his senses, or he whose heart is never filled with joy in any object of desire to enjoy happiness.
He, who every morning and evening serves the Brahmana reciting the sacred Gayatri with Vedic hymns which are equal to a mother. That twice-born one having his sins destroyed by that worshipful goddess becomes purified (in consequence of it). The person who thus offers hospitality to guests, does not meet with any misfortune even if he has to offer hospitality to all creatures on earth including the very ocean itself.
Thereupon all those chastisers of foes, along with their mother, ran towards him. And being surrounded by the Brahmanas who were behind them they came up close (to Duryodhana).
I tell you truly that, if by my confession of crime wealth is gained for me, it shall be yours. Let your behaviour towards me be such as will give credit and honour (to me).
O you of great effulgence, I wish to hear all this in detail; how did the king of gods, Mahadeva become pleased with him.
And hundreds and thousands of Rākşasas, who had taken up their positions at the north gate, were honoured with worship by those foremost of men riding on cars or elephants.
Thinking of the three (viz., birth, death and decrepitude), I have renounced this transitory world for attaining that which is eternal.
And the great Rishis having fixed upon this (course), and seeing that it was proper, began in consequence of their mutual promise with all those kings, as well as princes and sons of theirs.
When the high-souled Rāma, who was endowed with a great mind and whose movements were graceful like those of an elephant (in his dance), set out carelessly for the forest without any impediment; Lakşmana protected him by virtue as well as force.
I did not allow that hero Kritavarman, when he asked for permission. O Suta's son, today also shall I stop Shalya from going away saying "Stay."
Do you acquire wealth, be happy and satisfy the Brahmanas with gifts of riches. I have told you everything in detail as asked by you; I shall now proceed towards the city of Dwaraka."
Vaishampayana said : Once upon a time, when the Pandu king was seated there with all his wives and sages, he suddenly got up. Turning towards the west of that mountain which had hundreds of summits on it he started for heaven in company with those great Rishi's; but as he proceeded the ascetics who were following him behind turned their faces towards the summit of the hill.
Then all the worlds, consisting of celestials and Asuras and Rakshasas cried out in fear. “O descendant of Bharata! I wish you a long life."
O son of Kunti, your father the Pandu also, seeing that prosperity which had been promised in a dream was actually realised by king Harishchandra.
O worshipful lady, if you are satisfied with me; then I pray for this boon. The twice-born ones have told me that children form the highest virtue.
Then each one (of the two parties) began to shoot their weapons at random. Radha's son was very easy in his onset and Pandu's son was highly firm.
Abandoning all the senses and their objects, one should then concentrate his mind on himself. One who has controlled all external functions of body and soul, can then see clearly what is in nature.
In that city called Ayodhyā, where these highly powerful persons are now living, many lascivious and ferocious robbers used to fight.
The weak and blessed lady, taking Bhima's feet with her soft hands and pressing them between hers began to fondle him.
Then, O king, the son of Pandu, taking up his mace and stretching out all four arms (to full length), stood facing Ajani with a determined mind.
Arjuna said : O great king, listen as I describe how in accordance with the ordinance I saw that god of a hundred sacrifices and worshipful Shankara.
The Rakshasa Agniketu, invincible in battle; the Rakshasa Rasmiketu and Mitraghna also enraged at a sacrifice offered by him.
I have done this disagreeable act, though it is agreeable to Subhadra and Keshava (Krishna) as also Arjuna.
If you refuse me permission, I shall not enter your hostile country. Give Yudhishthira whatever wealth that is in this treasury of yours.
They surrounded him on all sides, like the sun enveloped by a cloud or the earth by the rays of the solar disc.
The priest and all the ministers asked after your welfare. They said that you should speedily leave for attending a matter of great importance.”
Those two foremost of men are gifted with wisdom, O king; and they will not speak a word (against you) for your sake.
And those delighted car-warriors rushed against the Pandava troops. Then slaying Duryodhana's forces with their sharp arrows, they began to pursue him (Arjuna).
Thereupon after a long time Savitri gave birth to one hundred sons, all of whom were heroic and fearless.
And the wicked-minded Rāvaņa, subject to Destiny, does not bear in mind what is beneficial for him which was said by Malyavān.
By worshipping Govinda in the month of Falguna, one obtains a great increase of wealth and acquires happiness.
Then that great car-warrior smilingly pierced the heroic (Arjuna) with ten arrows, like a man piercing an elephant in battle.
Vaidehī, with her unblinking eyes saw Laksmana and Rāma like a wonder.
Shibir said Let that fire, who has been unkindled for the sacrifice of one hundred horses and is still not kindled be prevented from being kindled. And let him also lose his Pushkara as he interferes with those ascetics by creating dissensions among them.
And the dreadful roaring of lions, striking terror into all hearts and piercing through the sky was heard. Wounded with arrows those highly effulgent lions were in great pain; they seemed like so many mighty elephants having their trunks cut off or like a huge mountain being rent asunder by the wind.
Then like an elephant struck by a tusker, that lord of elephants took up from his quiver sharp darts and arrows. And stretching his bow full drawn with the string at its ears he began to pierce Suta's son in all parts of body.
Nakula said : O hero, you have defeated the king of beasts and Vriksha (deer) and that intelligent mouse. You are certainly superior in prowess to them all for having been able to defeat those heroes I am not worthy enough to fight with you." Having thus spoken he came near me.
When the auspicious moment had arrived, and when it was considered proper by his father (the king) he was duly worshipped according to the rites laid down in the scriptures.
Fly away quickly from this place for my brother is powerful. He will kill you all; therefore, go at once and do not delay.”
That minister, who having accepted a pure kingdom stained it with the faults of others and does not govern his subjects according to law, soon meets with destruction.
Then ascending the palace resembling a mountain peak of white clouds, Brihaspati met that king like Shakra (Indra) meeting with Brahma.
The ten-necked one, having his arrows shot off by the son of Dasharha (Rama), is again lamenting over my destruction at this time.
In that battle, O king, like Vritra and Vasava fighting each other in the days of yore for crushing or being crushed by one another; those two heroes (Dushasana and Bhimasena) afflicted each other with their feet. They reproached each other with loud shouts.
Then having rendered vain that shower of arrows, the leader of monkeys discharged flaming shafts like snakes with blazing hoods.
I can see no means of your deliverance. I shall, therefore, cover you with my body and die along with you."
The celestials, the Danavas and Gandharvas. Pishachas, birds and serpents-all these can be subdued in battle; what need I say of men?
Having taken them away I am unable to return home. And now also, my heart is pained exceedingly and therefore I cannot give up these boys of mine.
You have said that the Unmanifest is also knowable. It has been called Purusha and you will hear now of its motion and rest as described by me.
I shall today kill that Panchala prince, who is as terrible in battle like the fire of dissolution and also Keshava along with me. Today will I root out your pride from this field of battle."
The precipices, having large and quick descents with their summits covered by mountains of earth or rock; resembling huge bells falling (down) from the sky, are swallowed up in caves.
Who is there, who does not esteem Krishna? And who is there that will not pay homage (to him)?
He who controls his mind, he who can endure the taunts of others, and be not impatient when afflicted with sorrow is a man capable of gaining wealth.
That great Asura, coming there and taking away all my wealth along with the Rakshasas who were guarding it in his house.
If a Brahmana, who is devoted to his fathers and whose life has been prolonged for many years, becomes attached to any other person or thing after abandoning the high-souled Mahadeva of long duration.
Seeing you, I have been filled with fear and therefore it is that I am afraid of coming before you. For everything gives me pain.
Beholding all the sons of Dhritarashtra fly away from battle, Bhima rushed with speed towards them striking hundreds and thousands of arrows.
Thereupon, that king, desirous of killing those two heroes (Krishna and Arjuna), discharged a mighty shower of arrows.
Nakula also, having been deeply pierced by the arrows of your bowman and fallen down on his car was seized with a high fever.
Do you see, here are deer and other beautiful animals with their young ones. My mind is greatly distressed at the thought that I have been thus left by Vaidehī who has eyes resembling those of a cat or mouse.
The elephants, furnished with golden nets and armours, standard-bearers as well as the warriors in their chariots looked like so many blazing hills.
Stretching ten yojanas in breadth and rising thirty high, he became as firm on earth as if it were made of iron.
To-day the Rākşasas deprived of their friends will fly away, with eyes bathed in tears and anxious faces.
What kind of creatures are living beings? Where do those who die go? Tell us this, for we have heard that all things come from and go into the same place.
Having thus resolved, the mother and son went away from that hermitage. We have heard that having accomplished their object they both ascended heaven.
And he (Ravana) commanded Prahasta, the lord of all Raksasas, to guard his western gate. He also appointed two exceedingly mighty and large-armed brothers-Mahāparsi and Mahodara,-to keep watch over his southern entrance; as for his son Indrajita of great illusion, encircled by a number of Räkşasa's, the king had ordered him to keep guard at the eastern door.
Virupaksha's charioteer, the Rakshasa with burning earrings and having eyes resembling sun-rays caught up his horses.
I am now very hungry, O king. Therefore you should give me food according to the ordinance and not neglect my duty from covetousness for virtue itself."
After this I shall describe various kinds of the senses. The Brahmanas, knowing the truth, say that by taking the feet for their subject one may acquire knowledge of Soul.
That king, who is proud and ever desirous of honouring others with honours himself, never feels happy when he hears any speech that is agreeable or beneficial.
Those snakes, urged on by Kala and excited with rage, began to creep through the earth.
Then that puissant Drona, began to afflict the Panchalas and Matsyas and Kekayas with their Srinjayas and Pandavas.
The pious and intelligent king, with his head bent low in humility, then asked that foremost of Brahmarshis about the name (of the person whom he should offer Arghya).
They offered him drinks which were sweet and intoxicating; they also gave them food that was cooked with clarified butter, having been eaten by persons who had bathed in the morning.
Going there, he saw the Pandavas living in that forest with their mother.
O king, do not blame yourself for this. You are righteous and therefore you will certainly succeed after a little exertion.'
Vaishampayana said : O best of kings, I am narrating this story at your request. Listen attentively to my words.
Who is there like me that can live when I have been thus seized and carried away by Kichaka in the very presence of Matsya, the king?
And Sugriva, having gained victory and enjoying his kingdom in peace with all the comforts of life is living happily.
When the brothers had thus talked with each other, Laksmana rose up in the morning and Gahka agitated by sorrow spoke these words to Rāghava.
The ground was covered with kalashas, vessels and plates broken into pieces as also with the fire of sacrifices.
During the rainy season they live in clouds; during winter, always taking water and food with them. In summer also, their lives are a life of penance (for they never eat when fasting).
Why do creatures live, and again go back into life? What is the great fruit which one obtains on account of it, by living forever.
Confused by the great weapons they fell upon one another, and looked like flower-decked trees in battle.
Sahadeva then smilingly cut off that arrow, as it was coursing towards him in the battle-field with its wings made of gold.
Vishvachi, Mishrakeshi, Alambusha, Nagadatta and Hema (Soma), Adrika-Kritasthali.
On the king's coming (to my house), I shall go into exile; all else has been renounced by me in consequence of his displeasure. Unrighteousness is a great misfortune for either one who lives in forest or dies there. By death, however, righteousness may be attained.
As a person has acquired certain nature, he is said to have that particular nature. A wicked soul through his anger and covetousness acquires all sorts of vices which make him forget the true course of life.
I shall be your friend and there is no snake equal to me in speed. Be quick, come after me at once.
O sinless one, do not speak untruth. What are your views about this matter?
The cool breeze, fragrant with the odour of sandal and other perfumes carried off from their bodies all sense of fatigue.
O hero, as you have told us your fears regarding Arjuna, we shall provide for their removal.
The Creator of us, who are devoted to asceticism and the lord of all creatures takes himself as invincible. But if we conquer him he will be conquered by us.
O king, the night appeared as if deprived of its stars. And that best among Bharatas saw those nights illumined by numerous lamps.
"Invoke the celestials and Gandharvas, O Viśvāvasu! Invoke also all classes of Apsarás with all celestial and Gandharva."
But he did not kill them in battle by depriving their life-breaths. He only promised the slaughter of his sons at Bhimasena's hands.
We shall have a heroic bed in battle if we fight. These enemies, O Madhava will not be able to bear us without bending their heads low.
Hearing this order of the god Vivavasu, he came back home and thinking with great joy about Sarasvati.
Uccaihsravas, the foremost of horses and Kaustubha that gem which is also called amrita stood up.
Then, O king, a fight took place between those bowmen and yourself; the world became enveloped with dust, as well as covered all over by showers of arrows.
Beholding me burning, he began to shower on me clouds of rain. Therefore I was not able to consume that desired firewood (of mine).
This is my daughter, O king! Having been brought here by Vishvamitra and others at their pleasure. She has been vanquished in battle by your sons; And this bow of celestial make, broken now in the midst, was formerly possessed by that high-souled one (Rāma) in a large assembly.
The wise men know the daily companionship and association with these creatures, but ignorant people never understand it.
All the kings, O foremost of Kuru's race, will come here; and we shall have to show due respect to them. It is not proper for us to do otherwise.
Then Partha shot at him showers of arrows, all drawn from his bowstring. The son of Pandu then baffled the weapon discharged by Drona with another weapon of his own.
O Rāma, this speech of yours is excellent and sweet-sounding; you are the purifier of all creatures.
That king then entered the palace that was like Indra's abode and which was splendidly furnished with ornaments. And by entering it he lit up the sky, resembling the moon in splendour among stars.
O king, listen with rapt attention as I tell you what a man may meet with from his own wicked deeds. He shall not be able either by time or the gods to escape them (the consequences of those acts).
In that battle, the son of Pandu cut off innumerable bowmen and elephants with goads yoked thereto; charioteers driving good cars, standards, horses and arrows drawn from quivers. He also slew numerous hands armed with swords or other weapons as well as heads adorned with armours.
Know, O auspicious one of good looks that Karna who was born in order to bring about a quarrel and thus create discord among men is the Sun himself. That Soma which was cut into two pieces by those six great car-warriors on account of the Pandava's dowa and also he who divided his own body for obtaining victory at any cost as well as he who burns all creatures with his rays (the sun) is certainly none else than Karna.
One who is able should, by any means gentle or severe that he may find suitable and effectual for the purpose, rescue his soul from distress and do what piety requires.
O foremost of birds, a pure person should always celebrate Shraddhas. The faults that I have mentioned shall be his and not others'.
Kripa, the foremost of carwarriors then placed on a chariot, O king, Duryodhana who was possessed with anger and whose energy had no limit.
Although such conduct is seen to be followed by some, yet this does not show that it forms the eternal duty of all.
The period of six months in which the sun passes through all his houses, viz., Aries (Krittika), Cancer, Libra and Aquarius is known as Dakshina.
Narada said : 'O king, this great boon is also granted by me.
The sons of Prishata, who are called the Shvaulas and Drupada's brothers also those heroes headed by Dhristadyumna. O descendant of Bharata, knowing that they cannot be defeated in battle, follow your duty towards them as a son should do his father's wealth."
O monkey, tell me how many strongholds of Lankā there are. I wish to know all about them from seeing them (with my own eyes).
The sound of his conch filled the sky and earth, as also all directions. Hearing that sound which was full of grief, horses, elephants, cars and men were struck with terror.
Thereupon Jishnu, worked up with rage and almost dying for the blood that was shed from his wound on both sides of the breast, took out his bow named Vindu. And he began showering arrows upon Drona's son like a cloud pouring rain in torrents during the rainy season.
The foot-soldiers, the charioteers and horse-men as well as all other classes of men then stood around those foremost of kings like a mountain range.
In this way the four-faced Mahadeva and the thousand-eyed Balasoudana became (the two forms of) Shiva.
The best of the Brahmanas (Atri) then, again and again offering oblations into that tank of water which was in his house. And desirous of reaching that place where Pulaha had bathed he went away from there.
O king, the greatly powerful Janardana knows everything of what has happened and will happen. Then summoning his charioteer Daruka he said-"O son of a charioteer let my excellent car be yoked.” Neither the celestials nor Gandharvas, Yakshas or Uraga (serpents)
Those persons, who are desirous of acquiring merit by going round the world in their own person and those also who abstain from all food, acquire purity. They do not become so on account of eating fruits or roots only, or fasting for a certain period, or living upon air alone without any kind of sustenance whatever; they may have shaved heads but that does not purify them nor can it be said that they would gain purity through having matted locks on their head, or sleeping on naked beds, or sitting with legs crossed. They cannot hope to obtain purification even if they live at one spot for ever, If they perform penances, or attend sacrificial fires, or drink water which is mixed with clay, or sleep upon hard rocks, or fasts daily, they will never succeed in gaining purity.
His bow-string resembled the roar of a huge mass of clouds. And his bow was strong, with flexible string and made of gold decked with gems.
That tree, wounded with a sharp arrow shot from the string of his bow and also cut into pieces by that dreadful weapon, began to fade away.
Seeing a Brahmana there in disguise, the king was much surprised and adored Pritha (Kunti).
We shall, in company with one who is truthful and faithful (to his promises) and skilled in warlike expeditions, enter Ayodhyā after the period of our exile.
He, who lives in the house of others and leads an orderly life thus is said to have performed his religious duties. How do you think about this subject?
And blood began to flow on the way, and Lankā sent forth dreadful cries.
Beholding Sītā installed in the hermitage, Laksmana became greatly depressed and his senses were overwhelmed with grief.
Thus wounded by the powerful enemy, that subduer of foes taking up another bow assailed Satvata.
Seeing him greatly aggrieved, all the Rakshasas began to roar with delight. The birds also were stricken with grief and fled in fear from before Kumbhakarna.
When a man is always engaged in acts of charity and mercy, his enemies are pacified as well as his friends.
Your desire, O foremost of Rākşasas, does not produce your wish and Destiny also is inactive. The entire universe is destroyed by Destiny and it itself is slain by destiny."
The Asuras were fierce, of tawny hue and had teeth like those of the mountains. They also wore matted locks on their heads; they carried conchs in their hands, five feet tall and huge bellies.
Having thus welcomed the Brahmanas with fragrant and pure flowers, that mighty-armed son of Pandu presented each one of them a golden coin, several excellent fruits of good omen, also many pieces of cloth and costly garments.
Lomasha said : Having seen that high-souled one, and having heard his words of benediction those celestials went away taking the Grandfather with them.
Surely a part of his ascetic merit still remains, for I desire, O worshipful one, to know the fruits (of that virtue).
One enjoys happiness by making gifts of wealth and property, that is good for the gift. One also enjoys happiness by giving away an intelligent man or a brave one; and so does one who gives over an ignorant fool or a cowardly person incapable of acting on his own will.
The great ascetic Vishvamitra, having finished the sacrifice of the seven Rishis, went round it from behind and beheld Agni burning in a flame on account of his desire.
My body is burning like a heap of straw, for I cannot see the hero Dhananjaya at his side.
Those monkeys, devoid of sense and having their heads turned by the desire for fight, approaching Laks mana's eldest brother who was a refuge (to them), took shelter in him.
Bhima then pierced him with ten straight-flying arrows; and he again struck him (with seventy) shafts, having their knots depressed.
The Rishi said : O gentle lady, the words you have uttered are very short. But as they do not suit your stature and frame, so shall their fruit be but small in proportion?
It is said that a son is born of one's own self; therefore, men should look upon their wives as mothers and children as fathers.
And as if they had been set in motion by the Wind-god himself, these trees with their tops covered over with flowers and leaves were all shaking.
Do not let the dog, that is your dear one and who has eyes resembling lotus petals, face of moon's splendour and a pleasing countenance be touched by anyone in this forest without first obtaining permission from you. The dog should live like an oblation poured into fire on altar during sacrifice; do not allow him to run away here at once.
Then the car-warrior, that bowman and spear-man of immeasurable strength-the son of Pritha-Pandu's Dhananjaya rushed towards him.
My eyes have become weak, my arms are trembling and seeing you far off on the way deprived of Sītā.
Seeing Prishata's son thus insulted, Arjuna looked at him with angry eyes and sighing heavily said 'fie' again and again.
Thereupon, all those high-souled ones having duly worshipped the god of righteousness went after him in joyous mood.
I also give you eight boons, take them. O son of Pandu, bending your head and hearing my words.
The earth looked as if strewn with snakes of many colours. It was studded all over with the golden umbrellas belonging to the princes (of the Kuru race).
When Vaidehi had thus spoken, the great ascetic Vishvamitra along with Vashishtha said these words to that heroic king.
O god among gods, how did Devapi and Vishvamitra acquire their respective status? O divine one, tell me this. I am very anxious to hear about it all.
I do not see that the duties of a Kshatriya are being performed by Krishna. He should be able and desirous for fighting with us, O you who wish to keep away our enemies from attacking us.”
In that king in whom virtue shines, people call him a righteous monarch. When virtue is lost in the said king, then do they regard him as wicked.
Yudhishthira said : O best of those who are in debt, I am a Brahmana (one that is learned and well read), come here. This son of Dasharha, this fire of the Kuru race has formerly burnt down many forests with his blazing energy; he had conquered Mahabala of great strength by the help of mighty arms. What will Dhananjaya do now?
The seat of your preceptor is very worthy and sacred. He will not see you without first hearing from you what business brings you here, O foremost of Brahmanas.
(On account of this) those foremost of men, all gifted with great energy and beauty, were adored by me as the great Indra himself is worshipped. Why did they go to hell?
O king, Yajnasena's daughter Sudeshna who is the worthy mistress of her attendants and who has come here for serving them all lives with great misery.
You shall not live long in this country, O worshipful lady, peopled by the Rakshas and dreadful. And you cannot bear a moment longer your separation from him dearer than life itself.
O hero, the war that had been arranged between us will never be accomplished; let now your funeral rites be performed like mine.
If your son, desirous of being happy and contented with the kingdom which he has obtained from the Pandavas, wishes for peace and does not take up arms then do you too accept that state of things.
Those two greatly powerful warriors, both of whom were excited with anger and who had been the pupils in the science of wielding maces under the preceptorship of that wise son of Rohini (Krishna), became equally equal to each other as Vasava was to Yama or Indra to Varuna. O king, those two highly puissant men also resembled Vasudeva and Rama and Vaisravana on one hand; they even equalled Madhu-Kaitabha in battle.
Then the preceptor, desirous of meeting with Yudhishthira and who had been created for slaying foes, began to consume those armies like a conflagration consuming heaps of straw.
Having slain these Rākşasas, who are left? What should we do next, having rescued Jānaki.
Draupadi said O Suta's son, you are not going to be pleased with me who am helpless and destitute like a poor woman without any ornament on her body.
Quickly, come here; we have not yet gone far away. We will take you with us back from the place where your wealth has been stolen.”
Let this lord of rivers be under your control; and let you increase along with Soma.
O king, that there may be no subsequent repentance in consequence of our conduct towards those brothers who are stronger than ourselves and the sons of Pandu.
Then the Pandavas and Panchalas beheld that hero Drona, endued with great prowess, slaughtering all their troops.
And none, O Sanjaya, was found in my army who had fought a battle; and all were poor men.
Your troops did not come up in that battle, which resembled a fight with Death himself. Thereupon the son of Hridika taking another chariot came forward.
Then that highly energetic charioteer spoke these words in a low voice, O you having Suman as your chief of the horses. “O charioteer, do you behold Rāma's grief on account of Sītă.”
Then having collected Vibhatsu (Arjuna) in a room by the help of thousand chariots and ten thousands steeds, they were all delighted.
The mountain was adorned with golden chains and garlands of flowers, clothed in rich robes and covered over with Kalpataru trees (trees which yield gold). It shone like the very sky.
Men applaud the death of their enemies that are ungrateful, and who have been defeated by a skillful warrior in battle. At critical times one should never hesitate but at once proceed against an enemy however weak he may be; for even such an enemy must not ever be disregarded.
A person, who is ignorant of the nature (of all things) understands twenty-five sorts. The person however, who has knowledge of nature does not understand them as distinct from one another.
We see, on the western shore of the sun (the earth), a creature resembling an elephant and having his countenance like that of a Parigha. In the last parva of the Sun he has been seized by Mahagraha; now is blowing swiftly with darkness the Wind-god's breath; so too has disappeared from sight our luminary.
For what reason, O Nala, have you been afflicted with such great sorrow? But by means of my poison shall your grief be removed.
Karna said that you are incapable of fulfilling your promise, for the son of a preceptor cannot be expected to do such an act.
The Brahmanas, having drunk the blood and being highly delighted thereat began to dance in a body. They then said that it was excellent wine of very superior quality which they had got hold of;
O best of the Bharata race, seeing his illusion dispelled by Karna. Ghatothkacha once more created an invisible one on earth.
O chastiser of foes, I wish that you may obtain what is your own. Do not be attached to the possessions which belong to others, 0 best among men!
The vulture said : I am Indra. I have come here in the guise of a crow for ascertaining your knowledge about virtue, O learned Brahmana!
I have now, O Yudhishthira, described the conduct of those virtuous men. They attained Heaven by making gifts and performing sacrifices,
Vaishampayana said : O Janamejaya, after thus speaking to the sons of Pritha (Arjuna and his brothers), Narada went away with those Rishi who had come there.
As a light burning in front of another one, helps it (the other) to burn more brightly by throwing its rays on the latter; so do these five sense organs and also others shining with knowledge help each other.
The high-souled Dharma's son, who is like Indra himself and who has come here of his own accord for preaching the duties laid down in our scriptures. He may be your master or he may not; but this one thing I tell you-do you quickly accept him as a disciple."
Your seven friends have sunk down and your former associates are now disreputable. And they have been deprived of their fame for having approached you, the destroyer of your race.”
Some trees had flowers on their branches, which smelt sweet. Others looked like black clouds; and some again were covered with green leaves. These flowers said-"This is not right." "This tastes bitter," “Look! this is very beautiful.” The Madhukara (bee) was intoxicated by the juice of those flowers. He came back to it only to fly away at once for another flower. As he drank its nectar, his lips became red in colour.
Having gone away, those rivers and the Gandharvas returned where they had come from. The wives of Bharadvaja then went back with his permission.
Therefore, O Brahmana, I wish to hear of the knowledge which has been acquired by you through your good fortune. You are well-read in all scriptures and have a retentive memory; and also, your understanding is sharp.
And O king, neither the Gandharvas nor Siddhas and Charanas were able to follow that light-footed one as she ran.
Beholding Raghu's son dejected, and like the Moon fallen from his place in heaven, Lakşmaņa said these sweet words with a smiling countenance.
Sairandhri said O son of the charioteer, do not lose your senses. Give up life today! Know that I am always protected by these five men (the Pandavas).
And, O hero! your absence will again afflict me with grief. Having experienced greater misery than that from which I have just been delivered and afflicted by sorrow of mind.
The next morning Samba took up his mace which had been the cause of death for many in the Vrishni and Andhaka race.
Sound, touch, form, taste and scent constitute the fifth. They are said to be always engaged in action and hence they do not exist for ever.
What person, having eaten there and considering himself born in a respectable family will break the provisions intended for others?
Hear, O son of Kunti, how the history is related by me for your well-being. When our understanding is under control we get over sorrow and misery.
The Rishis, with their hearts pleased at the reception they received and also out of respect for that preceptor (Vashista), went from there to Brahma's capital, where Yajna was.
The virtuous king (Yudhishthira) should act like a lion, who destroys small deer. He ought to punish the sinful Dhritarashtra's sons with his arrows of words.
Seeing that shaft thus severed, like a snake deprived of its poison. Atikaya became very much enraged and shot five more arrows at Lakşmaņa; but those were cut off by Bharata's younger brother before they could reach their mark.
Knowing those auspicious marks of his own nature, the destroyer of Rākşasas again began to afflict Ravana.
The course of the counsellors was that their interests should be consulted; but they all agreed in one thing, and this has been recognised as a middle path.
Then the charioteer, learning Kharas intention, ordered his horses decked with golden ornaments.
O king, with his numerous arrows Arjuna killed many warriors mounted on cars and elephants.
Partha and Krishna sported with their friends in the woods, on water, or within houses as they pleased.
Having seen that the way was impassable and Sugriva bowing down, I had nothing more to say.
Therefore, O son of Pritha, you must protect the Brahmana's property. By this means, 0 mighty-armed one, may you attain to that which is for ever your own.
There is no defeat, O king of the enemy when they are killed. And those thousand car-warriors that you see,
Then Duryodhana and others summoned the Pandavas for battle. Knowing that they were desirous of peace, those hostile people became once more excited with wrath.
O king, hear me as I relate the story of those Brahmanas who were all learned in the Vedas. The sons acquired immense wealth by their observance of religious duties and then distributed it among others with charity at proper times for acquiring merit (in this world). They are known as men whose minds have been purified through self-control.
Then that great bowman (Arjuna), taking up a flaming arrow, set on fire the wheel of his adversary's car and then struck with it Kaksasena who was as white as the moon.
O Arjuna, acts which are done in obedience of the duty prescribed by scriptures and from desire for their fruits are said to be performed with attachment. These are not regarded as renunciation.
And arriving at the Jahnvi, having various forests of trees and streams flowing cool water over-flooded with large fishes; like sky in the evening clear without any cloud.
Dhritarashtra said I have heard, O Suta from you in full all the deeds of that intelligent son of Pritha. Are they also known to you as true and complete?
Who is the god of gods and who is the father (among) the Pitris? O grandfather, tell me this which is superior.
If a man perform his rites with sincerity, they prosper. One's mind is disturbed by one's thoughts; and words are affected by the acts performed (by him).
These creatures, going into water become one with it; and those that go into fire are merged in the flame. Those again who enter wind acquire a share of its essence. Thus all these creatures meet their doom without attaining to Liberation.
Then Vasishtha and Bharata asked that undeteriorating one about his body, the fires in which he had been born as a pupil of Agni's fire, trees, birds and animals.
Arjuna said : O king, this one of truthful prowess has been protected by you today in battle. When the ruler will be alive and when he will not yield his kingdom; then none shall act capriciously (in any way).
Non-injury, truthfulness in speech and mercy towards all creatures constitute the highest virtue. Truth is established on noninjury; and having made truth his foundation, man has created diverse kinds of knowledge.
The Kankas, the buffalo's and vultures began to utter dreadful omens. Terrible beasts of prey with horrible looks uttered shrill cries like those given forth by burning flames when they rise up in fire or smoke.
Having thus addressed the Brahmana, Kunti with her sons went in great joy towards that charming city of Draupada.
Who opposed Chekitana, that great bowman and hero of the Vrishni race who was considered as superior even in battle by a hundred men?
Hear, O Karna the various sounds of arrows and other weapons emitted by those high-souled warriors riding on their cars or elephants.
There are some very difficult and inaccessible places; they cannot be crossed by birds, not even other animals.
For destroying all enemies, the lotus-born Lord had created that darkness. But as soon as he thought of it (for his purpose), that dark cloud vanished away from view.
Listen now, as I describe the names of snakes which are generally heard in this world and also their respective places.
O Shakra, some of them are under the influence of wine; others again have been seized with a swoon. Some may be asleep and many others might have given up all hope (of victory). Therefore, O lord of gods, in this battle destroy your foes by acting as you like."
O king, we have not been burnt at the hands of that wicked-minded Dhritarashtra and his son (Duryodhana) through their own misfortune.
O king, Kripa always followed the example of his preceptor. The observant Dhritarashtra paid great respect to Vidura also.
No good can grow in a family that is weakened and burnt by the fire of adversity. Do not therefore, ever feel yourself weak!
Then, in the thick darkness of night resembling that which takes place at a time when Indra and Prahlada are fighting with each other, Ghatotkacha began to pierce Drona's breast with ten arrows. Struck by those shafts shot furiously like flames emitted from fire during the universal dissolution he fell down on earth, his senses having become stupefied as if some tree had been uprooted; but regaining consciousness again, O king, he held fast unto his standard staff for supporting himself thereon.
O descendant of Bharata, when numerous weapons were thus taken by him in battle and many others killed; that one of highly effulgence did not get angry.
Vasudeva said Regarding it is cited the old discourse between a disciple and his preceptor, which has for its subject matter liberation.
It is heard that creatures are stupefied at the time of their death. The king has made this a matter of actual experience by his acts in the world,
O king, the daughter of Mithila thus replied when she was repeatedly asked by me saying-Go!
In this form, the thousand-eyed Vishnu with a hundred feet and incapable of being killed sees himself as one in many forms by virtue of his illusion.
He, who is acquainted with the true nature of all things and their origin as also their destruction, can never be deluded in his mind by any object.
O king, then Brahma created the Brahmanas with his mouth; Kshatriyas were made by him from his arms. The Vaishya came out of his thighs and Shudras issued forth from his feet.
Thereupon, the lord of earth Dhritarashtra regained his life and embraced him with both arms and touched Pandu's head.
As the sky does not rain in places that are high or low, so all over this earth was covered with blood.
Then Kritavarman, O monarch, smiling all the while and having pierced each of those mighty car-warriors with five shafts wounded Bhima in return with seven arrows; he then felled from his chariot that standard together with its driver.
This is a long story. But it has been told as if in presence of both the brothers, and they have thus agreed that such was their case; so let them enjoy this sweet wine with music and songs in company together.
Having ascertained his acts, you say that they are not in harmony with them. What is the use of their being so?
O son, how did you come by the foot of Vishnu having immeasurable energy? How could I know this place which is difficult to reach and even impossible for me.
The red eyes of that snake appeared as if they were spreading terror around. And the smoke, through its own lustre, grew larger and larger in those parts.
Vaishampayana said : Having heard these words, the son of Kunti spoke thus before all his brothers in a loud voice.
Regarding this, first the general views of all should be ascertained. Then, according to them and with patience one should try to find out what is their particular view about it.
Having heard the words of our friends always desirous of doing us good, we have been brought near death and the Rākṣasas are slain. And now all these (men) with ourselves as well as self destroyed by your action.”
Brahmanas are said to be engaged in the study of Vedanta, Kshatriyas for protecting people and Vaishya for collecting taxes.
This blue and yellow bamboo forest looks more beautiful, for its trees are covered with many a flower of various sorts.
If today I do not find the faultless, sweet-faced Sītā of Maithili's race (then) shall all creatures and Gandharvas and men and serpents be turned into stones.
Nahusha said : O beautiful damsel, let it be as you have told me. Having learnt that I am dead, perform my funeral rites; and remember this (that they were performed) truly.
And, O king, flames blazed up on all sides and the ten cardinal points were covered with smoke. The clouds could not remain in space any longer.
When their army was reduced in number, the Pandavas were delighted and they sent all those Kaurava soldiers to Yama's abode.
Taking up two bows with fearful twang and discharging powerful shafts, they covered each other.
When the time comes for doing good by all creatures and when what is desired of all, then who is learned man that will kill an animal which roams at pleasure in a forest?
A person who, on a certain day of the lunar month in which his birth falls, takes bath and worships Varuna under this constellation, acquires success in all medical operations.
There is no end for the thirst of knowledge. The highest happiness lies in contentment; therefore men learned in philosophy regard it as their chief good.
Thereupon, the monarch in company with those Brahmanas and others present at that sacrifice concluded it according to their wish.
Yayati said : Let a person who is false in his vows and who breaks the duties of marriage, become barren. Let him also be deprived of all knowledge (of Brahma) for whom he plucks off Pushkara's hair.
Approaching the king of mountains, Indra-the lord of celestials, filled with great delight began to rule over his kingdom.
And with arrows shot from the bow and discharged in volleys, and with darts hurled by his hands and terrible blows given with their feet.
Thereupon, the vast crowd of spectators became highly delighted at seeing that wonderful feat and they looked beautiful like ocean during the full moon.
That best of bowmen, that foremost hero in battle with various kinds of weapons, began then like Death himself slaying his enemies.
At the command of their king, they went into his palace and saw there an aged monarch resembling a god in person.
That man, who daily commits sins and reads a single Sloka of the Bhagavad-Gita is cleansed off all his iniquities.
Then Karna pierced him with twenty-five shafts; that son of Madri, like a bull (in the forest) proud and haughty.
Having been thus addressed, the ascetic said,-I have heard you; hear I also what I say. O foremost of kings! Let not your heart be filled with sorrow in consequence of this affair.
Having gained the hermitage, his wife worshipped him. But he did not feel gratified with those honours of hers; and in order that she might be deprived of them forcibly he took away from their house a calf for sacrifice as well as some large trees which were standing there by it.
If the sense be thus lost, one would never see anything; and if truthfulness were not observed on account of vice being practised or virtue abandoned, there will be no order in society.
By the strength of his arms, I have obtained Lankā and Sītă as well as Lakşmaņa; victory also has been acquired by me along with my friends and kinsmen.
O best of the twice-born ones, I shall do that which my worshipful Rāma will order me. This is what I have decided in my mind.”
As the fire consumes dry forests in summer, so Kumbhakarna consumed the monkey army.
Ashvatthama and the other foremost of warriors among the Kurus, having their hearts always set on war, and accompanied by many heroic and powerful elephants followed that array as if drinking water.
All of you with the great monarch (Rāma) stay here. I shall alone slay Raghava along with Lakşmana, Sugriva and Hanumān, as well as all these monkeys that are living in this place.
Sauti said : I have not been deceived by Janardana, nor am I afraid of him. But O delighter of Keshava (Arjuna), Shalva's weight is too heavy for me
That monkey, of a foul temper, began to deceive those heroes by the swiftness with which he coursed through their clear sky.
Narayana himself, the lord of all creatures, tells us that those who always read this holy work and have it recited in their house acquire great merit.
Then the two princes, both of whom were mighty car-warriors and who carried on their cars shields which had razor-like edges, slaughtered Chandra-deva in battle as well as Dandadhara.
And a man who is not virtuous can become so by virtue of his acts. One who is inhuman towards animals may again acquire righteousness.
Thereupon, the king of kings and foremost of men (Yudhishthira), desirous as he was in securing a prosperous existence for himself by performing excellent deeds, gave up his kingdom on account of dire necessity.
Hear, O Kshatriyas! All of you assembled here. You shall all be subdued by the enemies of Bhimasena and run away from them; it is not proper for any one to destroy that which has been done in accordance with the precepts laid down by our ancestors (in days gone by).
With purified understanding, with firmness of soul and self-control, renouncing all objects of the senses including sound; casting off anger, covetousness and malice.
Some men, O king, say that it is man who does all acts; while others, the learned Brahmanas and those versed in the science of creatures, consider Nature as the cause.
And those two heroes, accompanied by Krishna and having their bodies freed from the throng of men, shone forth like the Sun or Moon rising on a full-moon night. Their mother then thought over many methods for destroying them (in battle).
Hearing those words of the high-souled Sugriva, Hanuman leaped from the mountain Rşyamuka where he had seen Rāma and Laksmana.
When the sacrificer has poured his own life in that sacrifice which is performed with a willing heart, it becomes Agnihotra and he who performs such an offering obtains everlasting fame.
O king, slaughtered by Partha's arrows men and horses fell down dead on the ground.
He who performs a good act in the body of one person, enjoys that merit by living for ever in his own bodies. The acts done through all five senses are never destroyed; they follow him like six witnesses and also as an eternal soul (in himself). A man should give away eyesight or mind or speech or sweetness (of conduct), he shall then obtain with every oblation the fruit of these sacrifices which has been mentioned before.
O Sauti, I do not think that my life is dear. In fact, being afraid of death and wounded by arrows from behind in the battle-field,
O Vaidehī, I do not consider the abandonment of Man as proper in this instance. Rāma has done it for your good only.
Hearing these words of yours, O son of the king of Videha which you have given in reply (to Kaikeyi), Vidarbhā's daughter wishes once more to hear what had been said by you before.
Three things, O king, viz., a wife, servants and sons are the means of acquiring wealth. The riches that one acquires by them belongs to him who has got these three.
Therefore, one should never feel any affection for his friends in the hope of getting wealth from them; nor again, by means of knowledge which is born within himself.
The earth was covered with large numbers of monkeys resembling mountains or trees, and the forest resounded like clouds in rainy season.
Those terrible and huge-bodied ones are capable of moving in the sky. Their eyes are red, their faces pale; they have beards like that of the conch-shell; they strike with great force.
The Pandavas also acted as they were used to do, and did not act in opposition of Vidura's advice.
This is the end of all things, whatever exists and does not exist. It is also beginning and middle as far as those who are conversant with it is concerned;
If you can bear my smell, form and dress as well as complexion, I shall today install Kausalyā's son on the throne.
Then, finding the Pandavas and those brave warriors of celestials weapons thus stationed (before him), he angrily spoke these dreadful words regarding them.
Having saluted Sarva (Shiva) in his mind, he then said-“O exalted one! O illustrious god! if you are pleased with me I shall obtain the boon that is dear to my heart.
Then having obtained those six and five, he created as his sons the great Rishis of whom we have already spoken.
That act of charity which prevents a man from falling into hell and its darkness, that virtue which saves one in the next world as does a boat save men on board when it is tossed about by the tempest (on the sea) rescues him from there.
Arising from his own body, Agni created the worlds and himself; he also made a great ocean. The Rishi Atri had formerly destroyed fire, but it is always invoked by all creatures as oblation in their sacrifices.
Thereupon, O Bharata, Jishnu smiled and said to them-"O you who are guilty of great wickedness! Return from this spot. Life is better than death."
Disciple said Tell me truly where did you come from and whence have I proceeded, what is that supreme one? Where are all the mobile and immobile creatures born.
O king, therefore it has been said that virtue is superior. That king who governs his subjects well and does virtuous deeds wins the praise of all men,
He then fixed the arrow on his bowstring with a firebrand. Then that shaft, as also its string and staff, were all burnt up.
You think that you are alone; and know not, O ascetic, the ancient principle which holds that he who knows the true nature of sinful acts should perform those acts at all events.
The warriors, who are desirous of victory and having taken up various kinds of weapons look as if they were alive although deprived of their life-breaths.
And that Brahmana did not feel the least anxiety. Then king Duryodhana spoke thus to him, “O you of great energy, O terror-inspiring one like Yama himself! by good luck it is that today on the sixth day after my hunting for food in this forest and finding nothing else than meat I have been able to get a person like yourself as an object (of mine).”
The enemy, O sire, covered him with shafts discharged from their cars and they also began to strike the standard of that king.
He gave many elephants and gold-plated pillars, gateways, and spacious mansions; he also made the forest clean.
When the time came, that king (Janaka) issued forth at pleasure and beheld Sharmishtha sitting in a garden of Asoka trees.
If the pupil does not obey his preceptor, he should be sent away by a wise man. I shall never do what my preceptors have forbidden me. He who is afraid of such an act is only one-fourth part of Brahmacharya in real life."
The foremost of Kshatriyas, proud of their own superiority and desirous of slaying the son of Arjuna, all rushed against him saying "We were before you."
And with the help of his great ascetic power, and also by means of his strength in arms, he used always to subdue that son of Diti who was incapable being subdued.
Hearing this, Rāma was exceedingly delighted. And he said to his maternal uncle and Bharata also "so be it."
There is no other person in this illustrious lady who knows the king. He, therefore, lives here like a man without any form.
The sage Vasishtha and the other Rishi, with king (Rama) and his sons; as well all others that were inanimate. In that fearful darkness resembling ashes, there was a large body of troops lost their senses.
Having heard Bharata's words, Rāma accepted them. And having made Angada the lord of that kingdom he installed him on his throne.
Vidura said O king, without a doubt it is proper that you should be thus spoken by your friends. But the words of those who wait upon and serve you are never disregarded.
Arjuna said : O Brahma, it is your duty to explain that which is the highest object of knowledge. By your grace my understanding has become capable of receiving such explanations as are subtle and hard of being comprehended by others.
Then, O king a great battle raged between the two armies. The warriors rushed against one another in that fight;
We have no fault in this, that you were defeated at dice. The Parthas are invincible and the best of all victorious warriors; therefore they were sent into exile by our father-in-law (Duryodhana).
Vaishampayana said : Having returned home with his brothers, Vibhatsu adored the son of Dharma in company with Krishna.
Hearing the words of her lion-sire, that mother of lions, went towards king Rāma with kind speech.
One should remain silent and inactive, in his thoughts as well. The mind should be freed from all feelings of pleasure or pain on account of praise and blame which one may hear about oneself.
And like a plantain tree that has just put forth its first flowers, the beauty of Rāma's daughter increased.
King Yudhishthira then caused his troops to be filled with joy by the sound of conchs and arrows. Partha drew back his Gandiva bow, Krishna blew his conch Anjali and Bhima roared aloud. The terrible roar that was raised there (by Bhimasena) could not he heard for it being drowned in the noise made by all the warriors on both sides.
Saudasa said I shall see her some time hence in the forest or by a fountain. Not now, for she is not here with me at this moment."
Those, who bow down their heads even to those that have attained the celestials region are seen going there for certain (by virtue of my favour).
No person should make presents of only one thing at a time; for this, if the cow be sold with its calf and other things given along with it, such gifts are sure to cause death upon three persons in that family.
The ocean, abounding in Makaras, extends for a hundred Yojanas. It has been rendered impassable by the efforts of those who are proud of their prowess (in battle).
The people cleared the way for them, cutting down many trees and plants.
Having thus deeply pierced the Kaurava troops and having made them flee, Arjuna, O sire, marched towards the charioteers' division.
Then that one of terrible prowess, enraged and resembling Death himself, in anger took up a weapon; he rushed against the sons of Kartavirya.
The person, who is gifted with Brahma nature and whose soul becomes cheerful by being devoted to Me, does not grieve nor desire for any thing. He regards all beings equally; he attains the highest devotion towards Me.
O king of kings, with Karna and the son of Subala (Shakuni), as also his brothers Dushasana and others; Bhurishrava Somadatta and Maharaja Valhika all followed that best of men accompanied by horses of various kinds. The Kurus soon arrived at their capital city.
And having been thus accosted by Dhritarashtra, they (the Pandavas) told him the story of their journey through that charming country abounding in all kinds of jewels.
O Lord, you should protect me out of love for your disciple. The race has been almost wiped off by the sinful deeds that I have done in my previous lives.
Then the mighty son of Madri, Rukmaratha, being greatly alarmed himself consoled his army and said-
Why is sexual intercourse forbidden in the Sraddha of a sick person? And why should three separate balls be offered as pinda, each to one separately.
I shall retire into the forest. Do you rule in my stead! It is not proper for you any longer to burn me with your reproaches.”
Beholding Vibhīşaņa, the lord of Rakşasas with his terrible countenance advancing towards him, Radha's son smilingly checked (him), saying
Then in wrath the monkey, taking one of his arrows and with two others having many shafts attached thereto, discharged them at once (at Sugriva) from a distance.
Thereupon Kritavarman, by means of three and a half shafts shot from the string drawn back up to his ear, pierced Satyaki's bow-string.
He who is not competent, he that has a low birth or one who is shorn of all knowledge, he who is untruthful and crooked in heart, he who is lazy, he whose mind is depressed, he who makes long excursions into the woods- these are called Tamas.
The chariot of that foremost among men (Arjuna) is drawn by excellent Kambhoja horses decked with golden chains and yoked in the front.
O descendant of the Bharata race, as soon as he was born that child began to grow up and within thirteen days (of his birth) had attained manhood.
The dog said Let that twice-born one, who is the slave of his desires and who disregards Agnihotra, sleep happily.
Hearing those loud cries and seeing Madhava thus afflicted, king Yudhishthira addressed all his troops saying.
And strewn with fleshy fragments and blood, the field looked like a heap of conchs.
If a Brahmana is not honoured, if he is slighted and treated with contempt, or made to eat when hungry, it soon brings about his destruction.
Thereupon, as the sun rises with his rays shooting from all sides and throwing light on everything, so did that weapon of Indra's resembling fire or lightning in energy come down like a rainbow at the end of Yuga.
Then, O king of kings, while he was thus reprimanded by the shafts shot from his bowstring and arrows that were winged with gold. Bhima threw at him a couple of lances having sharp points made of iron; those two excellent lances flew towards Shakuni's breast on both sides in quick succession,
Vaishampayana said : Bhishma, Drona and Vidura then thus spoke to him-"You should pardon this act of yours. All is possible in you."
Again urged on by Satyaki, the Dravidas and Nishadas rushed at Karna in order to kill him.
How did that wicked king Dhritarashtra, under the influence of cupidity and folly, bring about enmity between those sons of Pandu who were all endued with every virtue?
Thus assailed by that shower of arrows, their bodies pierced and wounded (by the enemy) they could not resist Atikaya in battle.
O great king, be you our hundred years; protect your subjects as Indra does the three worlds.
Thereupon the highly effulgent Rāma, having his arms resembling a mass of clouds and holding a serpent in his grasp spoke thus unto Kumbhakarna who was coming on like a mountain.
And the mighty-armed Kumbhakarņa, resembling a mountain-ruler with his arms dislocated and covered in blood like an elephant torn by tigers; resembled a tree cut down by an axe. Thereupon he rushed at that lord of men (Rāma).
Then that great bowman, finding out the dreadful Agneya weapon of his enemy, set up a celestial Varuna arrow.
Saying this, Rāma with his monkey-army had gone away. I promise you truly that he will not return alive.
I have come alone, because they did not promise me that the trees and water would be spared by them.
He is truthful, self-controlled and a devotee. He has restrained his passions in the observance of vows and he knows how to please everybody; therefore protect him as you are doing us."
Then address Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, that angry one; and repeatedly ask him in their midst.
O foremost of the Bharata race, that one of mighty energy, like a lion (when he sees his prey), arrayed himself in battle order.
In the midst of all those gods, king Indra with a hundred sacrifices spoke these excellent and sweet words to Brihaspati.
Whether you enter into the inner ocean or go up high in air, whether your jump across the sea and fly away towards heaven. You shall not be able to escape from them for they are all celestial birds.
Thereupon Kāņva, having learnt the strength of his pupil (Jarasandha), ordered him saying. "Do you immediately bring Sakuntală with her son from your house to that of Jarastanđa."
Yudhishthira has for his guests always, a thousand Rishi's who are endued with penances and learning. Thirty thousand Snataka Brahmanas that have performed the domestic rites of their order; thirty daughters each of whom is married separately by him in this city (Hastinapur) to one hundred kings; ten thousand ascetics of controlled senses and retentive memory but incapable of being gratified by any gift or worship; these all live upon what he gives them.
O best of the Bharata race, in this world there are many sacred waters and other holy places. In all those places gods with Indra at their head together with Siddhas Rishis and Charanas come for bathing in Narmada along with many other virtuous persons.
O son, the world is now without Vedic study and sacrificial rites; its festivals are no longer celebrated. The people have lost their courage and they live in fear of death from Kala (Time).
The Rishis and the Devas, learning of Indra's intoxication with Soma, began to eulogise Shakra (Indra), urging him also.
He is distinguished for his patience and the power of enduring; he is distinguished from other men in that, while others are ignorant even when they have knowledge.
The Panchalas, it seems, killed that great bowman Drona in battle. That preceptor of ours was endued with strength and prowess; he had mastered the use of all weapons and was invincible in fight.
He who takes bath daily, and lives for three days without eating anything; he who touches the tail of a cow or bows his head to any man below sixty years old.
He is Rudra, he is Ishana, Vrishabha (Bull), Hara. Shamvah with a mark on the forehead, Chekitana and Paramestra as existing in existence and non-existence.
That one of immeasurable prowess, the heroic Samvarta, with great activity hurled his mace at that (mace) which had been hurled by Bhima.
The Vaishyas are born for acquiring grain and wealth. But the Shudras, from their very birth worship Govinda (Krishna).
Karna said : We have heard that among men, women are approved of for their beauty. But we do not know any such case as the one which I am about to relate.
Thus thinking and suspecting me, Samita with his friends and followers desires to kill me.
When the end of a cycle approaches, they will not be able to protect their crops. Those men who are always harsh in speech and fond of weeping loudly,
Then all the kings assembled at Pauri. And for a daughter, O Brahmarshis, there was held an enormous festival in that city.
Yudhishthira said : O grandfather, you have told me that one should live by giving away and also by penances. I am greatly afflicted with anxiety on this subject. Tell me why people of the world are so affected (by it).
With six well-sharpened arrows, all of which were furnished with golden wings and varnished by the hands of a skilful artisan, he pierced Drona's son as also his charioteer and driver.
Nahusha said Let the guest who has come into your house and is engaged in his own affairs be given knowledge by you; let him, therefore, be considered as a servant. He that steals from you Pushkara (knowledge) should be punished like any other thief.
And as he was coming, Rāma with joined hands and Sītă approached the ascetic versed in Veda like Agni worshipped by men. With Angada accompanied by many of his friends bearing gold ear-rings, hem-silk strings, armlets, bangles, and other gems; Käkutstha adored Su-yajña. Thus accosted, Rama influenced by Sita said : O gentle one do you give your wife a golden chain with Hema string!
The glory of Agni as described in the Vedas, you should know that such is his greatness among all these deities.
Hearing what the Panchala princes said, O Sanjaya, do tell me.
Having obtained such a grief in company with Indra himself, I have been obliged for my life to conceal myself from the enemies.
Hundreds and thousands of cars, belonging to kings possessed of immeasurable energy. O great king, were stationed around Yudhishthira in the city called Indraprastha; there also a thousand handmaids attended upon that prince (Yudhisthithra), who every day entertained his guests with food served up on plates by those beautiful damsels. Having thus distributed hundreds and thousands of gold pieces, this foremost of all givers has been afflicted for many years now with losses incurred at dice.
O son of Dasaratha, it is for the purpose of destroying these wicked and inhuman foes that this our work has been done. The great Rishis will again live here (in Dandaka) practising their own religious rites.
This food, which is as bright and shining like the sun, sustains all creatures. Therefore seek refuge with him who has given birth (to it).
Those mighty car-warriors, when struck by the shafts discharged from Partha's bow and also terrified with fear began to fall down on earth.
Seeing Vrikodara coming there, Janardana again addressed him thus in a voice which filled with joy the heart of that son of Pandu.
If you desire, O king, to behold these (warriors), give them eyes and let the battle be fought.
O king, after duly examining the daughters of his own race in accordance with due rites and forms. Dhritarashtra also gave Dushala (as a wife) to Jayadratha by following all proper ceremonies according as agreed upon at that time between him and the former.
Sauti said : That twice-born one, who is learned and the lord of his family, has come here as a guest. He is well versed in all branches of knowledge, observant of vows, wise, an excellent preceptor both in sacred learning and secular lore.
What monkey is there, so heroic as to cross a hundred Yojanas? Who is it who can deliver all these foremost monkeys from this great danger.
If you do not act in this way, O hero, he will become invulnerable; and if so we shall be destroyed.
O Krishna, it is Karna that always burns the Pandavas. Today I hope he will change his mind regarding me and the sons of Pandu."
The planets, viz., Rahu and Ketu as well as Brihaspati with his two disciples Satya (Sukra) and Kacha came in a body.
He entertained all the guests with food and drink of every sort, as also fruits. All sorts of delicacies were served in profusion at that meeting. It was well attended by many persons desirous of eating good things. The host had plenty of wealth, for he made presents of gems and jewels to his guests.
The self-controlled and virtuous-souled (Dhanvantari) rose up with his rod in hand, thousand years after he had gone down into the waters. He first appeared before Dhanvantri; then from those bowels of water came forth many excellent Apsaras.
This beautiful form of mine, O Partha, has been given by Varuna. He gave it as a boon in honouring me when he was adored by the celestials.
I shall surely go with you into the forest. O highly blessed one, it is impossible for me now to stop you who are so determined (to go).
Happiness at the end of misery, and misery as a source of happiness; these are found in those who have energy but not in idlers.
O Vrikodara, I can only speak thus much. As regards the matter itself and my intention in doing it, they are not yet fixed upon me; but when action is taken on them then may be known what will take place after that."
Having created all creatures and being the cause of their creation, he is said to be Prajapati.
Having thus performed all the rites in proper order, that foremost of Brahmanas began to gratify with speech and water both the celestials and manes. He then came where those ascetics crowned with success were sitting cheerfully observing their vows; they had come there following Suta's son (Karna).
The monkey, excelling all in virtue and knowledge as well as strength, is the foremost of objects for adoration. He exceeds in learning learned Brahmanas, in might Kshatriyas;
That best of the Kshatriya race then sent back (to Yudhishthira) six thousand heroic horses and ten thousands excellent steeds.
Sanjaya said When the young prince had been slain and when the old Kshatriya of Paurava race, having a lake with water for its ablutionary waters in it on his frontiers and also when Sudarsana of Malavas was killed.
If it be proper for me, I shall certainly do so; and having assumed the form of a mountain will destroy that Rākşasa.
He is the Creator and he is Destiny; he is Lord of all things. In his fullness, this great Soul shines in every heart.
The Sadhyas, the Vasus and the Ashvins as also all the Rudras with their wives, the Vishvedevas, the Maruts, created by the Primeval Deity in days of yore, are engaged in observing Kshatriya duties.
These cardinal points have been rendered useless, and deprived of the Moon by Manmatha. They are as if covered with clouds; they can no longer be seen in their usual splendour.
O son of Kuru, a mild man should not be harsh with an unkind person; and a kind one cannot act kindly towards an illmannered individual. How can there be peace between good people?
O descendant of Bharata, the army looks as if it is torn by Savyasachin (Arjuna) himself, because a terrible noise like that made by car-wheels and horses are heard from all sides.
They never become angry with their husbands. Those best of women preserve the lives, ornaments and dresses of all persons in a house.
Like a lion, that chastiser of foes did not at all think of the prince when he saw him coming towards himself with great velocity.
I hope that my mother, Kausalyā and the king (Rama) live this night.
What will that highly powerful one do with the ocean? And what also, O chastiser of foes, shall he achieve for Sugriva.
This earth full of wealth and the sea round it with its girdle, without you will not please me.
Meeting each other in battle, they could not go beyond the limits of their respective forces. They were all running hither and thither, pursuing one another; there arose a terrible din among those armies by night. The cars with their horses and elephants shone resplendent like so many torches.
Why do you speak like a woman of the Pundra race, who are inferior in every way? Your mother is Menaka and your father Agastya.
In this region the Brahmanas are entitled to rule. The Moon has his abode here. Mahadeva, after throwing down Ganga from heaven (in order that she might fall upon earth),
While the dreadful sound of wailing was still continuing on account of Dhrishtadyumna's being slain, Krishna said 'Go away Panchala prince! O Partha, kill Karna by saying- "Let go!"
The sin, O king, of a royal personage who robs another is considered as an act committed by him on his own account.
Like the minerals in a mountain from which lead and iron are procured, Karna was agitated by that severe blow.
Vaishampayana said : Sometime after this, Durvasa came upon the Pandavas happily living in that forest. Seeing Krishna with them he became angry and surrounded by ten thousand sages he went towards her.
Hearing the loud twang of Saumitri's bow, that powerful and highly energetic son of Ravana was struck with fear.
One should console a man of bad sense by reminding him of the past, and one who is wise in matters which are yet unborn.
O king, the earth was covered with numerous Nagas having raised arms and lips drawn up in anger. They were adorned by Kundalas resembling lotus-petals or moonbeams and looked like snakes of virulent poison. Their arms cut off by weapons resembled those of serpents after being slain. Some rising high and some dancing on their thighs and trunks they made that dreadful scene more horrible.
The king said O descendant of Bharata, it is not wonderful that you should be thus. You are the protector of all worldly interests and at one with women in your conduct; therefore do you act according to your own wish.
Seeing the king, with eyes open and a beautiful personage lying on his head all became stupefied.
O king, these princes are called Rukmaratha. All of them were mighty car-warriors and proficient in the use of cars as also elephants and steeds.
The Rohini milk, that is produced from the breasts of these women and which has been declared as ambrosia by the wise men, never turns sour; nor does wind become disagreeable; neither fire becomes extinguished; not gold loses its lustre and the waters remain ever pure.
He then pierced with straight shafts the horses of Karna and cut them into pieces. Then, O Bharata, those steeds mangled by his arrows began to fall down on all sides in a heap.
The minds of the warriors will be dispirited and Vidura too will try his best for doing good. He will create dissension between Bhishma, Drona and Kripacharya; when the ministers are thus divided and when all your soldiers flee away in battle."
Then slaying Bhima in battle, the Kuru prince sent forth a loud war-cry and cut-off his protecting shield with one of those maces resembling thunder-bolts.
O sinless one, the god of thunder was greatly terrified and afflicted with fear when he learnt that his army had been routed by a man who followed all wicked practices.
However, the highly powerful Sataniaka of Akuti's race quickly pierced him with his chariot wheels.
Yudhishthira said O foremost of Bharata's race, those foolish men who rob the property belonging to Brahmanas go where?
That disciple, who is well-versed in the twelve branches of knowledge and who knows that this entire world belongs to Him (Brahma), is said to be worthy of receiving a share from three or one fourth part of all his preceptor's wealth.
The exceedingly powerful and highly effulgent king of monkeys, Sugriva together with Prahasta fought on an equal footing with Nikumbha. In the same way did Lakshmana fight in a body with Virupaksha.
O king, the soldiers of your army were filled with wonder when they saw that Bhima did not fall down from his feet on being struck by a mace. Then the highly powerful Bhimasena threw at Duryodhana an iron mace which was very heavy and well-decorated with gold.
Before this, you had informed us that we are come here for fighting with the enemy. What is now your anxiety?
From that time, the host of Kauravas and Pandus have been engaged in fighting with each other. Since then I did not see the daughter (of Dhritarashtra) nor Drona's son.
O best of the Bharata race, hearing that Yajna had been performed by Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), many hundreds of Kshatriyas came there from all directions with a desire to see it.
Beholding the white horses of Arjuna yoked to a car which was driven by Krishna himself, your troops fled away in terror.
What shall I say in Ayodhyā? O daughter of Kausalya, where is the intelligent lady who asked me about her daughter-in-law.
And he saw, rising up in the sky and borne by the wind, hundreds and thousands of cars decked with gold.
The whole of that ocean is very extensive, its water cold and pure. It has no bottom; it abounds in fishes which live there by thousands (in the form of sharks).
Thus accosted by the pious king Yudhishthira in that assembly, Pundarika's eyes (Arjuna) of sweet speech and eloquence replied thus.
Thus have I, O Narada, described the mystery of you. You have heard all this from me and also our affection for you (by virtue of which we have done it).
Then Rukmani's son, drawing his arrow resembling the sun or fire in splendour and endued with great energy; invoked Mantras over it for destroying enemies.
In this context, Sukra said:-"There was no son of the illustrious king Videha named Janaka.
Thereat, the highly powerful Garuda seized all those monkeys with his arms and began to devour them like a snake eating up its prey.
They, as they walked in the path of that high-souled one engaged in doing good unto all creatures and not for his own sake presented him with various kinds of sweet scented flowers.
And Satyaki, whose arrows were as numerous and sharp-pointed as the clouds of rain during rainy season; was still more difficult to be vanquished than that (Shara) which fell on earth resembling the Sun.
If I do not today protect you at the gate, O king, while you are crying in distress, then it will be a great sin on my part.
O foremost of monkeys, there is none equal to you in strength or prowess in this world among the Daityas and Rakshashas.
O Duryodhana, I shall remember the good advice of my friends and all those that were given by me in days gone by.
That foremost of the Panchalas, that son of Kunti who protected the wheel (of his chariot), as if he was protecting a boat on an ocean, received Drona like one receiving his own father.
Even one who is ignorant may be known, O best of kings! One becomes a Kshatriya by performing his duties as a Kshatriya.
The steeds rose up with the excellent car, which was borne by those foremost of Yadus viz., Abhimanyu and Nakula.
As the jackal, deprived of his den and hungry for flesh, coming near a cowherd's hut, howls at him from behind; so have I been wronged by these wicked Kurus.
Abandoning the car of Dhananjaya, rushed against Radheya. And also O king, abandoning his own chariot and showering arrows (on Arjuna).
Seeing his enemies thus dispirited, the powerful son of Madri began to pierce them in battle with many thousands of arrows.
The creator of the universe, assuming in his next incarnation the form of a boar and taking up with one tusk as if he were a fire at the end of an age the earth that had been submerged under water.
And stricken with grief, she began to wail in the presence of her brother. She then shed tears and became pale-faced.
Why did you not at the time, being conscious of your own faults and ashamed to mention them yourself? I will destroy this Earth by anger; and scatter these mountains.
He will soon go with a thousand Kotis of monkeys, O Vaidehī, for destroying the Rākşasas.
I am bound by the ties of religion. Therefore, for this reason it is that you cannot obtain me back; therefore do I kill her who has been guilty and who deserves chastisement."
I do not divide my food with others; nor do I cohabit with another's wife. And having myself got a woman, I never play at dice in the company of women who are attached to me as their own children.
Those two heroes, with the help of their son's words as his goad, began that battle like serpents entwined together.
Then the two foremost of Kuru's race, Vajranabha and Vijaya again played together. Those two excellent boys ran about in circles.
He saw that dreadful forest covered on all sides with thorny bushes. And he, having his arms bound by a terrible woman (Rāvana) began to wander about in the woods.
We are all equal in this matter; we shall share with you our food. O sinless one, do not renounce your purity of conduct for the sake of eating that which is forbidden by us.”
In a short time those who had been shorn of modesty, and shame, who were fallen from virtue, and whose vows had become fruitless lost both the power of forgiveness (Kshama), prosperity (Lakshmi) and their own duties.
The troops, O king, were greatly delighted and uttered leonine shouts. Thereupon thousands of trumpets began to sound on all sides;
My heart is becoming lean and my mouth dry. By the help of age, exercise and speech,
Thus called by the son of Dhaumya, Arjuna's daughter Yuyutsu thought highly of herself and thus spoke to Janardana (Krishna).
The earth became full of the cries and roars produced by these animals. Some were struck with terror, while others died on the ground.
Thereupon the Rishis, desirous of ascertaining each other's powers first went to Bharadvaja and Prajapati. Gautama also came there; so did Bhrigu, Vasistha, Kashyapa Vishvamitra and Atri. Having travelled all round in quest of knowledge, they were fatigued with their penances.
He has four well-guarded gates, O best of the immortals; his stomach is in front and his two arms are behind him. His speech forms the fourth gate for him who knows duty (virtue).
O amiable one, you have lived in the forest for fourteen years, protected by me and Laksmana.
Thus wounded by the mace, O king, Partha looked beautiful. Like an elephant whose trunk has been broken he stood there bleeding profusely with his body rent asunder.
Let the best of monkeys ascend that excellent tree as if it were a bridge. And let those foremost among them, acting like their leaders and commanders remain on all sides here in formation.'
And, O sinless one, this is the auspicious time for my beloved; and it appears that her abode has become more beautiful.
Being afflicted with hunger, his wrath was increased and he thus spoke to the disciples of Vyasa.
Then O mighty monarch, commenced a great battle between the Kurus and Pandavas that was like death itself.
Having reached Karna, those arrows with Bhima's name on them and furnished with wings of gold and sharpened by stone entered into his body like so many knives cutting out life itself.
Vibhatsu (Arjuna) then slowly took his own forces back. The Pandavas, the Panchalas and Srinjayas all delightedly eulogised Arjuna in many beautiful words. Thus having defeated their enemies Dhananjaya with Keshava behind him joyfully marched on towards his camp.
Hearing that his younger brother Indrajit, the son of Ravana and a terror to all enemies was killed by Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana wept in excess.
The clouds, resembling mountains or large masses of trees and emitting flashes of lightning with their hair standing on end as if in anger like maddened elephants at war, began to roar.
I am a slave of my passions, O king. Therefore, O best among men, forsake your virtue for me sake, O descendant of Raghu!
Bhishma said Regarding it is cited the old story, O Bharata, of a Chandala and that Kshabandhu.
O king, why did you speak so rashly saying "Kill me alone and then be the ruler of all."
Seeing the head of Karna, that was like a piece of meat and which had been carried up above all other heads by this antagonist in battle, he (Arjuna) quickly cut it off.
Those two warriors, endued with great strength and capable of fighting in battle were like mad elephants rushing at one another.
Yama is the king of all righteous men; Mandhata is the supreme lord. He who controls his vital airs attains victory, and he that gives way to them falls down into hell.
Seeing that terrible weapon, the wind-god's rod in the hand of him who was then the foremost of all beings on earth and seeing also his wrathful mien, a great fear entered into Pandu's son with all the Somakas.
There is no difference between the individual soul and Brahma, because they are both one. Let my divine Lord tell me in due course how this will be.
That best of Brahmanas was highly pleased with her good conduct, behaviour and attention. He therefore showed great care for his daughter.
Thereupon, beholding those shafts shot by Ravana's son in the encounter, the lord of the celestials was enraged; and with a sharp arrow.
The ascetics who have attained perfection by their own efforts, and renounced all riches that they may possess (and hence are perfectly free from attachment), succeed in acquiring success through the performance of sacrifices.
Some ignorant people say that the odour of water is found in air and earth, as also on wind.
The sky, as it appears from the earth looks like a sheet of gold. There is no space in that golden expanse and there are also not any fire (to consume everything).
He caused Dushasana to be made the master of all kinds of food and drink. To Ashvatthaman, he said these words in regard to the acquisition (by them) of Brahmana girls.
There were also thousands of vessels, ten thousand measures and millions of jars made of plates;
All gifts, of which the gift of fearlessness is one, are performed by her. He who renounces his fierce form for the first time acquires an immortal life and secures freedom from all fears on account of those creatures over whom he obtains mastery.
Then the armour of that foremost one among men, being broken off by those shafts, shone like a clear sky studded with stars at night.
O powerful one, your touch is like the taste of ambrosia; and hence I have been revived. Therefore, o perpetuator of Kuru's race,
Beholding me, that highly effulgent Brahmana thus spoke. O Krishna of long arms you have conquered your wrath naturally.
Beholding his son slain, O Bharata, Shakuni smelt with tears and sighing heavily began thus.
Then, O Indra of foes, like Mahendra discharging his thunderbolt in all directions, he discharged showers of arrows resembling a network of the sky.
Vasudeva said : O king of kings, the prince Shalva (the ruler of Sauvira) having heard that you had come with an innumerable army and elephants marched against it.
O sinless one, I shall today send away the garland of fame which is your ornament. Today Suyodhana will renounce his kingdom and life-breath."
That best of men, the descendant of Raghu-the one who was fond of his sons-gave away four hundred thousand kine with calves and steeds yoked by iron chains; he also gave a vast wealth in gold (to other Brahmanas).
Today I shall destroy my anger which has been greatly cherished in my heart, like Arjuna's burning the Khandava with Dvaravati (Draupadi) within it.
Therefore one should always act in such a way that he may not be forced by necessity to abandon the duties laid down in the Vedas. One should never neglect his religious acts through pride of heart and spirit.
Having approached him, the king sat at his feet. O son of Kunti, a gentle breeze began blowing and making all parts of Gautama's body pleasant by fanning them with flowers.
You think that I am a hero who is under the influence of pride and death; for my character has been destroyed, my conduct has become shameless and also because I have lost all sense of modesty.
Dhritarashtra's son, having seen that all the sons of Pandu were silent, smilingly spoke these words (to Drupada), “Let my daughter be given today as a wife to your son."
Seeing the horses slaughtered and running hither and thither, I think your sons are pained in their hearts at seeing this slaughter.
O descendant of Bharata, Bhishma is capable of killing ten thousand car-warriors in a single day by means of his arrows.
One should always be friendly with his friends and enemies, never suspecting them. He who does not know the difference between good and evil cannot distinguish one from another in a dispute.
He was (then) admitted into the golden palace. And living in that abode he became exceedingly happy and greatly at ease, for a long time; but again being ejected from heaven by Shakra (Indra), he fell down on earth, having been thus deprived of his heavenly mansion. Having fallen upon this planet I have heard all about it.
Then the intelligent Bharata, who was of liberal vision and possessed of a beautiful countenance said "Be it so." And thus did that best among men make up his mind for staying in hermitages at night.
Then the powerful son of Pandu, seeing Satyaki burning with rage and his eyes red in anger, caught hold of that warrior who was running about.
Thinking “how shall I go through this great and hard calamity?” And how should she accomplish her object?" She became greatly bewildered. But she did not see that the fire of her own acts would burn down her sons themselves,
Even when he was living in the house of his preceptor, O king, Vidura had not yet finished his studies. Nor did he complete his knowledge of all the Vedas.
Thus addressed, he replied in these words to the best of Brahmanas. 'I shall do as instructed by you; and I think that it is my duty to follow what has been said by a highly wise person learned in all Shastras and desirous of doing good only.'
The army being thus routed, the ruler of men Bhagadatta suddenly rushed upon Dhananjaya with that elephant.
By giving away a pair of bullocks, one obtains the region of Vishnu; by making gifts of horses and elephants, one goes to heaven. Having given a garment, one attains to that portion of space which is known as Andhaka (the Milky way). Giving gold, one acquires immortality.
Surrounded by thousands of Rākşasas difficult (to subdue) and making the palace resound with his flowers, he set out.
When all the warriors had fled away, who was there that prevented Drona from fighting with Dhristaketu when he came towards him.
The understanding in my mind is very firm. I cannot bear Sītā, who has been separated from me.
The five kinds of sacrificial offerings, viz., the oblation into fire and other receptacles of clarified butter, are ordained in threefold forms. They may be made separately or mixed together as a compound offering. All these who make such sacrifices go, after death, to the celestial region.
Then let the other kings, viz., Bhishma and Drona and Kripacharya and Ashvatthaman, and Vivinshati of the Kurus' race, do me this favour.
For how long does a giver enjoy the fruit of his gift? And what is that which may be given as a small or great present,
O Karna, for the welfare of Pandavas Shakra will come before you in a Brahmana's disguise and ask from your ears those earrings which he desires.
Whatever living being moves in this world, the powerful deity of wind is the soul and supporter.
When Bharata was saying this, the envoys with fatigued beasts entered into that charming and inaccessible city belonging to kings.
I always live in large lakes abounding with lions and elephants, or on an elephant of a great size, O king; I also pass my days happily seated upon the throne of kings who are true men.
O prince, you must immediately return; do not be too far away. All of us are as powerful and beautiful like the very gods themselves."
Thus addressed, Vaidehi, with her senses confounded and weeping bitterly, said these painful words.
Then, O king, the highly powerful and wrathful Shakuni cut off into seven fragments that dreadful arrow as it was approaching him.
Agastya said : Who gave you that auspicious lotus, O chief of the Rishis? I think it is given by some one. You should not take away this padma without giving me something in return for it.
Those arrows which had killed the best of monkeys, Bāli; and also those with which he (Ravana) cut down Salva's tree,-these pierced Kumbhakarma's body resembling a thunderbolt.
And then those arrows, sent by Partha (Arjuna), began to pierce the Kaurava army in all directions.
And was being swallowed by Satyaki in the sky like Soma (by Rahu). Then hearing that sound, Kritavarman.
Deceived by those many-figured illusions, they all thought that Arjuna was themselves and therefore killed one another.
A king, however sinful he may be, always punishes his son if the latter does anything wrong. He never acts unrighteously in this respect;
Having celebrated the Rajasuya sacrifice according to all the ordinances and having acquired eternal fame in every part of this world,
O Dushyanta, even if you be the king of heaven I would wish that my son should rule over this kingdom with its four seas and mountains.
Who were there among the warriors who could then withstand that mighty bowman, gifted with prowess and endowments and invincible even in battle?
Thinking thus in his mind, the devotion he felt for Narayana suddenly manifested itself before those two gods.
The force of this weapon, which is called Dhatri and the strength thereof you have heard; therefore should be taken measures for its destruction.
Let all the Kurus come out of battle or let them speak ill about my son; I shall, alone kill all of you and make Bhimasena beat you.
That person, who is free from all faults and whose mind remains steady in the contemplation of his own soul sees that Supreme Soul.
That which is not said, although it should be spoken of; that which is said though ought not to be uttered and what one says in anger are all considered as untruths.
Then the king Vyaghradatta gave Udrona a set of golden dice. They were decked with five hundred sharp points and he (Udrona) threw them at him, O monarch!
Then Yudhishthira, smiling all the while and twanging his bowstring with his fingers struck Karna on head breast arms and face with four arrows.
Having heard that Viśvāmitra had come, the highly illustrious Sumati returned from his journey.
The Pandavas, O king, having thus performed their ablutions and the other rites of purification according to due order, spent that night in a camp.
Having made preparations for the restoration of peace in the world, that great eyed one (Krishna) obtained his excellent home.
Therefore, I will today kill you who have no children of your own. Know that offspring are the best of all things in this world."
He should search for the Asura in gardens, pleasure-grounds, temples of celestials, drinking-houses and stables as also at all sacred places.
And he (the king) was highly pleased and gave him a maiden of high family. Having given her away in marriage with many presents, the lord of Mithilā after obtaining permission from his subjects entered into his own city Mithila along with all those great Rşis who had come there accompanied by mighty forces.
For this reason all objects of acquisition, which are capable of increasing stupefaction of the mind and sense, such as covetousness, pride arrogance, fear, anxiety, these troubles attend those who acquire riches. Wise men know that they constitute great distress for embodied creatures in their attainment or loss, and even during their possession, for by acquiring wealth people have to bear many miseries, (such as) enemies who oppress them when rich and rob them when poor;
Having said this, the charioteer once more went away for bringing Rāma again quickly into his palace.
That man who every day celebrates the Shraddha on the days of Krttika, after having offered oblations into a fire which is attended by his kindred and relatives, becomes freed from all anxiety.
Hearing these words of his, Rāma joyfully addressed Lakşmana stationed by him.
And O you of slender waist, Damayanti in this world has acquired renown by her beauty and energy; by her gracefulness she is famous amongst men.
Then the ministers of that Raksasa, seeing his arms resembling two columns in strength and endued with power, were filled with wonder.
If this Maithili is really wicked, I have for thousands of years performed the most severe austerities; but all in vain.
May your speech, O auspicious one, be not fruitless through my favour! There shall only be a single son born of you.
In the city of Janasthana, deprived by me of its king and citizens, O Raksasa, (your wives) will range at their pleasure over all the forest.
Be not moved; let the tears be restrained and all your fears dispelled. I shall take Rāma, along with his brother, before Yama's abode."
He then speedily wounded Jayatsena with ten arrows having iron heads, and he roared like an elephant that had been pierced.
If I am not a sinner, then should this calamity befall me because of my former deeds.
He (Arjuna) cut-off with many arrows, that mace decked in gold which was coming towards him.
O Keshava, having seen this (i.e. the destruction of Draupadi), you should have reproached me more than any one else for my sinful acts?
If we all remain here, their small force and Krishna who is wounded severely will surely be our victory.
Sanjaya said Beholding the ruler of the Sindhus slain in battle by Partha, Kripa the son of Sharadvata was inflamed with wrath.
O child, for what reason is a Brahmana born in this world? That which is so difficult of attainment should be renounced by those whose souls are not purified.
And on that day, he saw a broad and deep river with her banks overgrown with golden lotuses.
The princess of Panchala, who was in the inner apartment of Sudeshna (Draupadi), pleased that goddess by her praises.
And also the steeds and their riders, O sire, that had been slain with weapons in battle;
Beholding the Pandava's chariot thus mangled, Karna again began to pour showers of Brahma weapons upon Dhananjaya.
I know that the virtuous-souled Rāma, with Sītă and Lakşmana is living on this great mountain Citrakūta.
Then, the brother of Daruka and his favourite charioteer (Sumantra), with a cheerful heart sent forth that car yoked properly according to the rules. The standard was furnished with a lion made of gold having golden hairs; it was surrounded by Ketakas blossoms resembling clouds at sunset. It was decorated with standards bearing white flags shining like the colour of cloud. The umbrella had a staff of pure gold and its cover spread over various sorts of weapons. And it bore many excellent ornaments made of silver or gold.
They then tied up and bound the limbs of their enemies, cut off those parts which were to be cut-off and killed them by severing vital organs.
O king, that great chariot was destroyed by a maddened elephant in some mountain cave.
The son of Pandu, O king, thus repeatedly praised your achievements and filled my mind with joy.
I am well aware, O king of your having been thus afflicted and also that you have lost the respect which was due from others.
Thereupon springing up quickly, he struck that Asura with his mace. Struck by him in wrath the latter resembled a mountain and fainted away.
Recovering consciousness, Nakula the son of Pandu rushed again upon Subala's son like Death himself with his mouth wide open.
The great snakes, burning (with the fire of Kāla), fell on all sides. And emitting dreadful roars resembling those of clouds or rain-bow.
Thereupon the Air-god, addressing Nala in the assembly thus spoke,-"O king! I am subject to death. If you kill me then will I do your good."
The Pitamaha (Brahman) has described the great Rishis and all the celestials, as also every branch of learning.
Having been thus addressed, the great Rishi again spoke as follows delighting both Vrishnis and Pandavas.
Inflamed with rage, Phalguna's prowess increased twofold. Then in that battle he took up his Gandiva bow and stringed it quickly.
Born on this tree, I have been endowed with many good qualities. Protected by my mother and surrounded by friends in the days of infancy I was never molested by enemies.
Those who had slept on the beds of other people, in that city called Varanavata, are now lying down asleep on this Earth.
The virtuous know that the ornaments of virtue are not broken up; these are silver, gold and other auspicious objects.
Then with that car of the splendour like fire, O king, he began to rout the Pandava troops. And rushing through those ranks of his enemies in battle, the son of Shakra resembled a mass of clouds on the sky.
Sumitra and Laksmana had come there before (Lava) in order that they might witness the auspicious installation of Rāma.
By worshipping the god of wealth in his form as Vaman on the twelfth day of the month Ashadha, one acquires great merit and also obtains a human body.
May he who carries away your Pushkara, study all the Vedas with a pious and virtuous disposition!
The man who is never satisfied with his own deeds, does not reap the fruit of his sinful acts.
Sītā, looking at her husband as he set out, again and again understood his words spoken from affection.
The son of Drona, thus being assailed by the prince of Panchala in that battle, quickly shot his arrows with a view to destroy him.
The great hermitage of Vasishtha was near the Tirtha named Sthanu. And on its right and left were those of highly intelligent Vishvamitra.
Having pierced Khara with his arrows, the powerful Rama took up a very fierce anger in order to destroy him in battle.
Then Karna pierced him with one hundred shafts of depressed knots. He then cut-off the string and bow-stringed his own powerful bow in a moment.
The king is like the thousand eyed deity. He sees what morality is and he follows that virtue, O best of men.
And that foremost of Rākşasas, being enraged at the twang of his bow-string, and unable to bear it any longer ran against Raghu's son.
As long as Bharata has not been sent away from the city, that is my opinion about your coronation.
Sorrow is produced by thirst; and joy by sorrow. From happiness arises misery, and from this again originates the same (joy).
This ground strewn with flowers looks like a bed spread out by itself.
When the Sun and Moon along with Venus will be in conjunction,
Neither Garuda nor Nagas, neither the celestial or the Asuras can defeat you in battle.
These kings, these princes and all the heroes of this earth will be killed by you; they are brave men who have their arms like clubs.
Karna, wearing his mail armour and holding the reins of his horses in one hand and a variegated shield on another stood at the head of that army.
O descendant of Bharata, when the enemy was vanquished in battle with no help and his kingdom won without shedding a tear,
Tell me all, O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), about what is agreeable and acceptable as well to the wielder of thunderbolt.
Having suppressed his grief, that lord of earth burning with sorrow again said in a voice choked by tears.
Thereupon Brahmā, seated there said:-"O exalted one! great is my delight in Shvetaketu. But I am exceedingly pained at the same time with his incapacity (to comprehend). O lord of universe! renounce your energy and strength; by virtue of your favour let me regain my own nature."
One's father, mother and children are all alive. Some other relatives of yours also live in this world, O best of men!
These two are the sons of Janaki and they also belong to my race. O you that cannot be defeated, these both are your children; I am telling you this truly.
To the speaker of truth, should be given a cow with black hair and golden horns; if he is satisfied all the celestials shall also become pleased.
Then going with speed, the son of Sumanta endowed with quickness in action brought all those learned men conversant with every branch of knowledge.
By asceticism one may ascend heaven; by gifts, riches. One knows salvation by knowledge and washes away all his sins in holy waters.
Have they, O son, obtained honour? Are these persons free from all ailments. That highly powerful and graceful bowman Drona's son is living in the kingdom of which he has become a citizen."
Vidura said : I shall describe the subject in accordance with what great Rishis have described, after bowing down my head to Him who is self-existent.
Having perceived that Shuka had become firmly attached to his conduct, he soon planted a tree on the spot where Vrishaparva was seated.
As all the learned men, versed in Vedas and other scriptures have declared that king Yudhishthira will be a great monarch, possessed of every kind of wealth; he shall also possess many priests for serving him. He is already blessed with much food and riches and he has an excellent sacrificial ground ready made for his use. Therefore they performed the ceremony called Sarpa-satra (in which snakes were sacrificed) so as to make it easy to get rid of them (from their kingdom).
Then, O monarch, the twice-born one caused that damsel of faultless limbs to be brought there by a Brahmana who was conversant with all mantras and had studied from the mouth of Atharvana.
By means of my arrows which are as long as the ears and which cannot be seen by any one, I shall destroy this Apsara who is obstructing your union with Mithila's daughter.
At sunrise, the ascetics, with their bodies lying on earth and deprived of life by fasting were seen in great numbers.
As the sacrificial fire which is kept in a receptacle, when brought out of it goes into an altar; so has this one (Rāma) been born from you and split asunder. In times gone by I was living at my father's hermitage engaged with other children in playing on the banks of lakes or forests.
What is there more surprising than this, that Suyodhana though thus placed in danger of his life yet hopes for it through the help of your power.
When the king establishes peace and prosperity in his kingdom, then all orders duly perform their respective duties.
Then the clouds, being beaten with thunderbolts and having heard those curses, began showering flowers from heaven.
The aspect of that dreadful and inhuman battle was terrible. O descendant of Kuru, those who were at the head (of their respective armies) became confused by reason of its noise; looking at each other they began to tremble with fear.
Thereupon he was given by them celestial clothes, ornaments and excellent cloths of silk.
O beautiful lady, do you favour me. I am your devoted servant; and whatever will be conducive to your welfare shall certainly by done by me."
O son of Pandu, I am thinking about that disciple who was so dear to Rama and on whom all the knowledge in this world depended.
He then with his arrows felled Sudakshina, the Khatadeva and Vindhyadhana.
Those, who have been established in the duties of a Kshatriya and who are desirous of achieving their own prosperity, should not be pitied when they fall on battle-field.
Let the time come for carrying out his design. Either he will sport with Sītā, or kill her."
That chastiser of foes, Satyaki rushed at him again and again. Beholding his anger in full display he fought with the son of Dhritarashtra (Duryodhana).
Having slain Sharabha with his fist and Nila with a blow on the thigh, he then struck Indrajit with the handle of his discus.
Then, O king like a hawk darting at his prey and contracting all the divisions of your army with showers of shafts.
And you, who have been adored by me in my abode and protected as also entertained with food at the proper time, do now enter into this house of mine.
The Balakins, carrying the water in jars on their heads and roaring like clouds with thundering rumble, stop for rest at lofty mountains.
O you having eyes like lotus petals, how is it that my patience will not be exhausted in this man. Forsooth, your son the king of Ikşvāku dynasty (Rama) shall seek refuge with you."
You were also created by your father as the destroyer of Bhishma. The high-souled Shikhandin was protected by you and therefore death could not touch him.
Seeing the lightness of hand of Vasava (Indra), that foremost among all wielders of weapons, as also those celestials headed by Indra were highly pleased.
Having thus struck Yudhishthira with straight shafts, he killed the charioteer of that prince and sent him down from his car.
That man, who is angry with those that are enraged at him and who also accepts the good deeds of his enemies when they are angered, has attained a high state.
Then shall you, O hero, with your brothers and Draupadi eat up this Earth extending all the way from ocean.
Those who have acquired a knowledge of the origin and development of all things, as also those whose senses are purified by their own control or through Yoga (meditation) do not take birth in this world.
O king, there were also the great Rishis Astika and Narada and Parvata; Bhrigu Vasistha Kashyapa Gautama Vishvamitra Jamadagni.
The Ashoka tree is the refuge of those that are afflicted. Its six branches have a sound like that of bees, and it is capable of saving persons from being consumed by fire.
Surely, he must be away from the place where I have not touched him. How could she live with me if her eyes were ever deprived of their lotus lustre?
O foremost of virtuous persons, I desire you should tell me truly about the subject. Be blessed. Tell us everything in detail.'
These (the Danavas) are taking away their wealth and also destroying it by great powers. In fact, they take the wealth of Agni from his very mouth in competition with him for that purpose.
Vaishampayana said : Then all those Brahmanas, who were overwhelmed with anger and stupefaction by the Hunkaras (sacred mantras), struck that sinful Rakshasa.
Bhishma said Regarding it is cited the old story of what was sung by Vamadeva gifted with intelligence, after having seen all things.
O king, all these (i.e. friends) viz., sons and fathers and mothers and wives with their husbands and brothers and associates and companions came together for the sake of friendship.
Thereat, worked up with rage and rushing in battle against the son of Sini (Krishna), he said "I am not under the influence of Destiny or Gandharvas or Asuras or Rakshasas.
And passing by all, that powerful one endowed with prowess entered into the mansion of Rāvana-the lord of Raksasas.
Which of them shall I kill, or which shall I bring along with me? How can you say that what has been done by your sons is a proper thing for one who knows the difference between good and bad conduct.
Men, who are active and energetic in the performance of their duties always become superior to inactive persons. Brahmanas being the best among men, sacrifices have been placed upon them.
Thus, O king of kings was the case with all those twice-born ones. And also in respect of the Kshatriyas and Vaishas; but as regards the Shudras they were not so fortunate for they had no regular employment.
O Madhava, if you have any regard for me then do we march first before Bhishma.
Thus accosted, the king replied saying 'Let them be carried away and let loose your horses; a place for sacrifice shall be fixed on the banks of Sarasvati in its northern side.'
O great one, act according to my wish and for your good. Do what is agreeable to me; do what will be beneficial to our friends. And with all the energy of Indra himself in autumn, strike at this hostile army like a powerful wind blowing from the west."
He, who always behaves in this way towards his kinsmen and friends and also towards those that are neutral, lives for ever on the height of fame.
O sire, having slain that vast army of your, Chekitana and Shikhandin together with the sons of Draupadi blew their conchs.
Bhishma said : Regarding it is cited the old history of that which was asked by Shatakratu (Indra) himself from Padmayoni.
How can we live and how shall they increase? This thought pierces my heart when I think of the distressed sons of Pritha.
As they approached him, the king Kuvardhana ordered for drinks and food as also excellent beds.
Then fixing that arrow of great impetuosity, he let it go. That shaft pierced the son of Sumitrā as he was coming on and struck him in his breast.
Thereupon arose a loud sound of the twang of bows and arrows, mingled with sounds made by conchs, kettledrums and tabors. The Kurus then began to worship that son of Vikartana (Shalya).
You are well versed in the Vedas and other branches of learning, you have performed many sacrifices. Do not fight with others, O son of Kunti; do not kill any heroic warrior.
Bathing and offering oblations of clarified butter (to the Pitris), he then went to Kaubera's Tirtha. Practising austere penances there, O king, Ailavila obtained the sovereignty over wealth.
When the king begins to be careless, all these and other vices are born. Therefore it is specially incumbent on kings that they should always do what will promote their subjects' interest.
Vrshanka (Indra) took up the water of this river and poured it on his head for securing a place in heaven.
Some are heating, some burning and others roaring. The clouds give forth lightning flashes of lightnings (and) rain.
By which I may be able to live here without departing from my own duties.
Having conquered by unfair means what learned man would not be pleased? Even that sinful son of Pandu, Vrikodara (Bhima) is rejoiced.
The people, oppressed by the oppressors of herds, are living in forests and jungles. They have given up their cities for leading a life dependent on fruits and roots.
Thereupon being thus assailed on all sides with blazing arrows, he was greatly inflamed. Being thus excited by me the mighty weapon grew in strength.
Krishna said : O you of sweet smiles, I think that this horse is the offspring of Krishna (the holy cow). Come with me for a little while and fight. Let us see who will be your slave today.
O king, that encounter between Karna and the Rakshasa was very fierce like that of Indra or Shambhu with Ravana.
I shall, by myself alone, without any one knowing it and when opportunity offers itself speak my beneficial words. And in your affairs of gain or loss I need not be consulted.
O slayer of foes, you have performed the act worthy of praise and fame. Enjoy your kingdom with your brothers; long life is yours.
Janamejaya said : Why does the illustrious Agni wish for burning down Khandava, protected by Mahendra and full of various kinds of animals.
So also among the Andhakas and Vishnishs, Krishna has no friend equal to us.
Thus addressed by the king, Arjuna folded his hands and said:-All that you have said is true. It is so as you say; but it should not be thus.
Get up, O king! what are you doing? Why do you grieve for the enemy that has been killed by your strength. Having vanquished an enemy with great prowess how can one wish death upon himself?
O wretch, who is there that would venture on kill me with the mace in my hands? Even Purandara fights fairly even when fighting against the gods.
In that dreadful battle, elephants rushed against their comrades and crushed them all by means of the strength of their trunks.
Vaishampayana said : No sooner did the king speak, than all became silent and calm in that assembly of princes.
That monarch, thus struck down by the weapon of Death, fell prostrate on earth like a Sala tree felled in a forest with thunder.
Then Krishna and Arjuna, quickly rising up from the excellent Brahmana, stood by his side.
All the people were greatly agitated and they began loudly lamenting.
O Vasava, this is not the proper time for killing him in battle. You should ask from Shakra (Indra) what you desire of him.”
The renunciation of a vow is not the abandonment of an act; it has been said that the abandonment due to ignorance (of self) should be called Tamasic.
As in an elephant, all the limbs of other animals are attached, so were all these limbs on his person.
The Brahmana is the refuge of all creatures. He should be adored by every one, and when he is not so done his welfare must suffer.
Vaishampayana said : O king, that girl of rigid vows gratified the Brahmana of rigid vow with a pure heart.
And scattering sandal and musk over the people, they said : By good luck your ceremony has been completed without any obstruction.
And having thus deceived Duryodhana with only one hand, he should enter into battle. I do not see that man who would today fight against Duryodhana in the field of battle."
I desire, O you of a blazing splendour, that through my life the name which has been acquired by me should be spread in this world. The man who is celebrated acquires heaven itself after death and he whose fame perishes ceases to exist.
O best of men, this dreadful destruction of your kinsmen has been brought about by Destiny or yourself.
The king of conchs is sending forth a loud noise, and rousing the earth as well as the sky. Savyasachin (Arjuna) must be in great distress!
Vasudeva said : A person who is not learned cannot understand my high and holy counsel. One may be a friend of one's own choice, but that friendship will always depend on the state of his soul.
These my ear-rings, which are so much worshipped and known all over the three worlds. Do you bring them here (to me).
The stars began to dance round the sun and a shiver passed through the great mount Kailasa.
O hero, these great deer again and again come here. I wish that you should understand my signs which are intended for your information.
O Purandara, you are conversant with the scriptures and yet what is this that has befallen? Surely it must have been due to Destiny for no man can defeat her by his own exertions.
Having granted his consent, Galava ordered Suparna (Garuda), the eater of snakes and birds, to take away that girl for him. He then went into the forest with her.
After Karna had been killed, the Kurus terrified and wounded by Arjuna's arrows fled away. They did not cast their eyes on that mighty standard of theirs blazing with fire in its body.
If one has made his mind pure and is engaged in righteous conduct, he can never be deprived of the means by which such a person lives.
As he said this, the king Mandasura thus spoke. "What can I do? Time is incapable of being overcome."
As Brahma is gained by the Siddhas, so this highest attainment of knowledge may be acquired. Listen now as I describe it in a few words O son of Kunti.
You have come here as my beloved guest. O sinless one, you shall be entertained by me this day and tomorrow according to the usages of guests.
The celestials with Agastya, the Gandharvas and serpents came there; also the highly blessed Rishis.
As clouds fill the sky with showers, Rāvana filled Raghu's son with arrows like a tank filling up (with water).
That hero, that best of men, that wielder of the Gandiva bow, with his armour plated with gold and iron and steel, having elephants furnished with golden housings and huge tusks, all brought up in Himavat mountain, began to kill enemies in battle.
If I have given, if I have offered oblations of clarified butter on sacred fires, and if I have pleased my preceptors, yet let me be the one husband in my wife's life.
Having thus measured the term of their existence, they are again born after every hundred years.
A friend, desirous of success, seeks a way for the accomplishment of his object. The means may be three in number viz., (1) one's own self; (2) friends and well-wishers; and (3), enemies or foes.
And displaying various kinds of warlike sports in the field, those two subduers of foes, began to smite each other with their maces. Coming together they looked like a pair of elephants striking one another with their tusks; and O king, covered over with blood, thus fighting (they) became exceedingly beautiful.
Therefore, O Yudhishthira, Kshatriyas are at peace when Brahmanas have subdued their energy and strength. In the case of a weak Brahmans, his power is as strong as that of a powerful Kshatriya. Those among all classes who in fighting lose life itself but still protect the dignity of Brahmana and righteousness also acquire great merit by means of those sacred words (of Manu). It behoves every one to take up arms for protecting both himself and his own religion.
O Ten-necked one, stop; for Shiva is sport on this hill. And the mountain was made inaccessible by all beings and celestials (Gandharvas), Rakshasas, Nags, Suparnas and Yakshas."
Then rushing at Bhimasena in a rage, that powerful Rakshasa grasped with great force the arm of his antagonist. That hand was hard and as inflexible as thunderbolt or iron.
O intelligent one, you shall go there with your counsellors. Do what I desire, o wise man knowing all the objects of desires.
The sky was covered with clouds; and the air became thick. And the birds began to wheel round in various directions on their right sides,
Then taking up another bow, the son of Madri endued with energy pierced Karna with twenty shafts. This feat was wonderful.
All your weapons, which have been employed and discharged today for the destruction of Duryodhana's troops are now returned into their receptacles. They will come back again in your hands when time comes (for fighting).
Having thus penetrated into that army, Krishna with his arrows resembling the wind in their impetuosity and also having seen your troops struck by the king of Panchala, was filled with wonder.
And that best of men, Rāma having sweet words (for his speech), awakes even in sleep on hearing the name of Sītä.
Those heroes, the Raksasas desirous of bringing about victory for Rāvana and equipped with dreadful deeds, came out, making the ten cardinal points resound. And they had horses adorned in gold; elephants resembling flames or fire; cars like to the sun itself; wonderful armour.
Draupadi said : Why do you ask me, O mother-in-law, who am sorrowful for the destruction of my husband Yudhishthira and know all his miseries?
The planets and the cardinal points, also heaven itself were all in a blaze.
His arrows were like the very eyes. They all had golden wings and they resembled thunderbolts in point of sharpness; yet, that mighty armed hero was not able to resist Ghatotkacha.
O hero, O destroyer of the pride of foes, you are going towards Yama's abode from here. You have forsaken me today by virtue of Destiny."
O Karna, when the thirteenth year passed by and twelve years were over (from that time), Pandu's son came before you with a view to beg for food.
Elephant-riders and car-warriors, mighty-carwarrior foot-soldiers as well as horsemen have been slaughtered by the force of your arrows.
When they were going away the king sent his messenger to inform them that Kala-Ratri had come.
O king, in that place was celebrated a great horse-sacrifice of the high souled Mahendra for purifying himself from his sin committed against Brahman.
Vaishampayana said : Having gone there, the best of Yadus, viz., Balhika (Balarama), bathed according to due rites and then gave away gems and gold to Brahmanas.
The Samshaptakas also, who are all marked out for destruction and Drona's son has challenged me. What is the next event? O Madhava tell it unto me. If you please do you get up from your seat in order that hospitality may be paid us."
What have you done? There is no hero in this assembly who will now dare oppose me. I shall, therefore, certainly take up the life of one of these men as prey."
O ascetic, the eldest daughter of Kashipati is known by the name of Ambika. The younger sister of Amla (Ambalikā) is named Kanīya.
Duryodhana is certainly very sorry and laughs at the thought of his own destruction; he, therefore, who has been seen in such a plight, should be considered as an enemy.
Even if Dasaratha should live after his banishment into the forest, yet shall I see this high-souled one of controlled senses.
And gems and pearls, and gold, and Angushaas fallen on the ground. And golden yoke with beautiful ornaments for horses.
Thereat making a terrible uproar, the highly powerful Hanumān terrorized that vast army of Rākşasas.
O foremost of men, I shall also employ the son born of Sītā and endued with truthfulness in your service; there is none else like him.
Thereupon the two Kuru princes, Utatama and Jana-mejaya, both worked up with anger; Yudhamanyu as also Sikhandin pierced him (Pandya) in that battle.
The mind is the ninth and understanding or intelligence, the tenth. Intelligence (in turn) gives rise to memory which is considered as eleventh in order; but this twelfth being infinite-soul-should be said to transcend all others.
Yudhishthira said : O grandfather, what is there that cannot be done by one man? But when it comes even the smallest of tasks how can a king do anything without others' help.
Vidura, conversant with all duties, having entertained Govinda (Krishna) duly and sent him away in safety asked the son of Pandu if they were well.
O Rāma, my mother Kaikeyi is always wicked; she has a desire for her own self. She is proud and angry in nature (and therefore) why did not that wretched one speak?
O sinless lady, it is certain that the destruction of Surakshita shall take place; and all those celestials descended on earth.
Bharadvaja said Tell me truly whether the sky and all directions, earth, air have any limit or not.
Through the grace of Dharma, I have conquered by means of a single bow hundred and one best Kshatriyas. They are all desirous of going to heaven in order that they may please king Yudhishthira (Dhananjaya).
From all directions there fell showers of shafts, shot from the wings and beaks of Garuda; or they dropped down out of air.
O Sanjaya, I cannot see the person who stands before me like Yama at a critical moment in battle.
Or perhaps this is not a wonder, as Vasava can be seen by all creatures in every place.
As you were at this time, O Maghavat, so was your mind in days of old; do now as before and seek that knowledge which is the highest.
Then the illustrious Indra was highly pleased. He then granted a boon on that occasion to Angirasa, of whom I have told you before.
Thereupon being terrified by that sound and seized with terror, they began to lose their consciousness in various places.
He is the embodiment of effulgence. His form has sprung from a modification of his own nature. Water, heat, liquid essence and touch have originated in him.
The Rishi said : O greatly wise and powerful man, as what you have told me is true so it will be. You are well-pleased with us; therefore tell us something about yourself.
The gift of a thousand kine, O Bharata, is considered as equal in merit with the gift of an earthen pot full of gold. Such gifts are productive of inexhaustible fruits and they also yield great happiness hereafter.
What can be the measure of that which is beyond our sight, and cannot he reached by us? The end of even Siddhas and Devas is fixed.
That sweet and various sound (of the Gandharvas) entered into sky, earth and also into all that have ears.
O foremost of men, the king is enjoying himself in a solitary and retired place. Going there I shall get information about my birth and life."
Then that one of eyes like lotus leaves, being praised by the great Rishis and filled with delight went away from there.
He who, without any compulsion does what is not proper for him and serves others with his own self, succeeds in acquiring happiness by suffering various kinds of misery.
O best of men, he cut-off the four white horses with his keen arrows and then cutting off also their standard and chariot into a hundred pieces.
They call you the Indra, they call you Rudra; Vishnu calls you Prajapati. You are Agni and you are mind in its subtile form; you are Power, O eternal Brahma!
A man becomes happy, seeing his son born like a new image in the mirror. The mother also derives great pleasure on account of her child and acquires heaven by virtuous acts.
I have described the greatness of that bird which has six necks. The method by which a cock can be made (to fight). Then also have been explained how a sacrifice may be performed with an excellent sacrificial ladle, and what is said about a wife who does not take care for her own good. All these things were told to me in olden days by Viśvāmitra for promoting my welfare. Therefore was Rşisņa ever beloved by Kuvara's son.
Hearing these various and excellent words of Lakşmaņa, the intelligent Sumanta, having faith in them said.
Shakuntala said O king, you see the holes in your own house which are not more than an inch or two wide. You do not however, perceive those that exist on other houses though they are also of similar size with yours.
The son of Sharadvata, Kripa, the Magadhas gifted with great activity and Satvatas as also Kritavarman are all on your side.
Bhishma said Regarding it is cited the old story of Vasava and Bali.
Then there will be a Vedas called Arvanga in this world. You shall acquire the merit of one hundred sacrifices (from it).
Janamejaya said : O Brahmana, I have heard with attention the full details of the installation ceremony of Kumara.
And wiping her eyes and repeatedly sighing, with a throat filled up by tears, thus spoke in anger.
The good always regard themselves as sanctified by their association with the pure and pious. Their conversation, too, is filled with scriptural knowledge which purifies them in every way.
O great king, the women and the guards of that hero became stupefied when they heard his voice.
Then bowing your head before the son of Shantanu, that grandsire and father of Bharata's race (Bhishma) who is also my namesake.
The son of Bharadvaja pierced in battle by Yuyudhana, and then wounded again with numerous shafts by Satyaki.
Bhishma said O descendant of Bharata, I shall tell you what you ask. Listen now to me the secret which has been told by Rishis regarding it, viz., that state into which one is born after attaining the object for which he wishes in this world and about which every man cherishes a desire.
Beholding her, resembling a celestial embryo and moving about like a goddess Kichaka was excited with desire being tormented by the arrows of passion.
Brahma and the Vedas cannot be seen anywhere else but here. This is not a time for any one of us, who are all united in this battle with Pakashasaniputra (Indra).
People, who live in this world for earning their livelihood only renounce all happiness and comfort. They never succeed in acquiring any of those objects they seek.
He, who, with a composed mind and his back turned in battle casts off life (for the sake of) virtue obtains regions which are highly meritorious after death. Having been thus addressed by king Duryodhana those followers of Subala's son (Karna), turning their faces towards death began to advance against the Pandavas.
The third part of the life he should live in Vanaprastha mode. While living thus, one must perform his Agnihotra and other sacrifices for the deities.
Then after duly paying his respects (to Rāma), the king, receiving his permission and bidding farewell to Käkutstha retired from the residence of Rama.
Rushing against the son of Panchala, he said in anger "I will not address you harshly. I shall kill you who are worthy of being killed."
Then your sons, like the wind agitating all trees, surrounded that best of car-warriors and again began to attack him.
The followers of the Sankhya system are engaged in its duties and those who follow Yoga, are engaged with yoga. Their vision is based on knowledge.
Thereupon, O mighty monarch, a furious wind began to blow raising the hair on end. At that time Rahu devoured both Sun and Moon at once.
That which protects a kingdom, that by which the thieves are repressed and by which victory is obtained in battle, is said to be the virtue of kings.
He, who is incapable of being vanquished by all the celestials and Asuras united together in battle. Behold him now sleeping happily on a bed of grass with Sītā for his companion; he has acquired success through asceticism and diverse accomplishments and energies and is like unto an exact copy (of Dasaratha) himself. On this one having renounced royalty, surely will not live long. And the Earth shall soon become widowed."
The celestials are roaring and laughing. They vomit blood upon her and begin to cut at each other's bodies,
These huge elephants of equal height with those mountains have been killed by Partha; they are falling like clouds.
Vaishampayana said : When the high-souled Pandavas were seated, Vyasa, son of Satyavati thus spoke-” O mighty armed Dhritarashtra, are you observing your asceticism? And do your thoughts find pleasure in this forest-exile.
In the Kshatriya order of life, which is highly superior and unlimited in extent (to any other), you have acquired great fame; yet I do not know how one can perform that duty from whence all virtue originated.
He, who is pleased with Krishna, conquers the whole world; and he that takes refuge in Keshava when danger approaches.
The soul, when the body is dead and deserted by kinsmen in a forest or jungle without any means of support, leaves it for ever.
There the illustrious Gandhari, that foremost of all women in self-control and observance of vows, sat down on a seat covered with cloths.
Then the highly effulgent Yudhishthira, giving up his pride and himself taking them away from that spot brought all of them back within their respective apartments.
That great ascetic, the royal sage Harishchandra has alone been described in this council of Indra.
Hearing these words of his, the Brahmana became highly surprised and thought within himself that he had heard a second wonder.
Brahma had fixed the number of years before, and Prajapati after him. Then Shakra (Indra) fixed three hundred thousand five hundred Panchas, Soma king with fifty thousands; Varuna also with one hundred thousand
Bhishma, Drona, Kripacharya, Ashvatthaman, Karna and the son of Shura (Bhurisrava), the king of Pragjyotisha-Shalya-the ruler of Sindhu-Jayadratha.
The sons of Dhritarashtra are certainly very sorry for the loss they have sustained in battle and their horses that have been killed, as also their men who have fallen on the field.
I have placed myself under your protection, therefore tell me what you are pleased with. O best of men! how shall I be able to get rid off from the condition of a slave?
When a king makes mistakes, the four orders of men (the Brahmanas and other twice born persons), their duties in life, the Vedas themselves with all the religious observances which form part of them and also all those religious ordinances that have been laid down for the several modes of life become confused.
And they came upon the banks of that river, which was roaring like a mountain and dancing with its waves; as if moved by an invisible spirit. It seemed like froth from water spouting forth at various places on account of wind blowing hard or appearing in crevices caused by earth quakes. The waters were covered over with numerous fishes, crabs, tortoises and other aquatic animals.
The men, O king will be so much addicted to lust that they shall rob Brahmanas of their wealth and property.
Where Vāsudeva, with his prayers and sacrifices for thousands of years, had been seeking the knowledge of morality.
They who are learned consider mind as the embodiment of qualities and also that which is unmanifest. It dwells in all creatures, it contains within itself all things; therefore one endued with intelligence should know him.
Thereupon, Arjuna excited with wrath cut-off his bow by means of three arrows and took up another still more fearful one.
When in the kingdom there are many royal personages that wish for advancement by such means, it is a great sin of the king.
They (the Pandavas) saw no other except Partha, who was capable of killing all the hostile kings with their elephants and horses.
When my sons, who resembled clumps of grass were being devoured by the fire that was Bhimasena's anger in battle what men stood before him?
The three worlds became enraged and the mobile and immobile universe were agitated. And there was agitation in all seas, O chief of gods.
I began then, with a cruel heart, as if killing animals and human beings in the forest. Then filled with blood I traversed all over Dandaka Forest.
On the bow of Madri's son, Sahadeva there were drawn gold arrows set with rubies.
Those two highly energetic ones, the son of Raghu and Lakshmana entered that asylum which was always inhabited by deer; it was auspicious and delightful.
For the protection of all creatures, he became Vişnu. And having slain Vſtra in battle, Indra was afraid for his life on account of that slaughter; and with the foremost of celestials round him (Indra), Vasava asked Vishṇu's permission to escape from danger. Hearing these words of theirs, Vișnu spoke thus to those assembled deities
Vaishampayana said : Having heard these words of Arjuna, Nakula addressed the king who is foremost among all pious men and he also followed his brother's thought. With a broad chest and arms like iron bars that one with coppery complexion spoke in sweet tones as follows
Thus protected by the Sindhus and Sauviras with their swords, lances and other weapons wielded in battle, that slayer of hostile heroes viz., Phalguna.
The touch of the cloth, and that of Rāma's body; as also a bath in water, are not so pleasant when experienced by a boy who has been touched by his son.
The sons of women who are wicked and the husbands, brothers etc., having renounced all, began to think only about Rāma.
The men, who have been always following the path of virtue and self-control; having their sins purged off by charity in its best form (i.e. knowledge); being endued with piety and simplicity of life; possessing tranquillity of mind and abstention from all sorts of injury or deceit; devoted to faith and religion; firm in belief and full of patience are sure to attain the highest goal if they hear this wonderful narrative about the Parva that has just been recited.
How, O child did your mind change when those heroes who had been fighting on our side turned away from the battle?
O Partha, that kind of firmness which is based on Yoga and by which the mind, senses and vital airs are controlled. That (kind) is called Sattvika Dhriti.
I shall not be able to go any where else, nor have I got another protector. Therefore you should try by your own exertions to prevent the course of Destiny from taking effect upon me.
They (Rāvana and Indrajit), encountering each other, began speedily to protect the other with every possible effort like a cat and mice.
O son, the armour of gold and beautiful as it is like a full moon that shines on the face of the sky and looks like the golden lotus. This broken shield with hundred slats set in diamonds and pearls, this excellent golden armours which lie scattered all over the ground; these dreadful-looking iron-clad ogres having faces resembling those of Pisachas are dead who?
O Pandavas, let all of you be collected and free from every anxiety. The path that will lead us to the celestial Mandara mountain is here (before us).
The gods praised the chaste and modest Ahalya, saying “Excellent! Excellent!” She was of pure limbs; she followed Gautama in all respects.
The wind with sharp arrows quickly destroyed the shower of weapons, that looked like a dreadful cloud and were poured by those mighty warriors.
Then the kings, all of them endued with great prowess and intelligence and devoted to virtue, having consulted one another said-'The enemy has been conquered' for they had known their own strength.
Then that highly powerful one, O king of kings, taking up another well-strung bow and shooting arrows within a moment's time covered the army of Subala.
Then, O slayer of foes, the son of Suta (Karna) discharged arrows that were incapable being borne by any creature. In consequence of those shafts he shot in battle Karna's body looked like a mountain with its peaks and summits cut off;
One's self is never seen as dearer than one's husband. Men who are desirous of doing what they should do, are rare in this world and always devoted to their husbands.
I shall tell you all the truth, for my going back and forth among men and gods. The way of heaven is like a boat; it may be taken by any one who knows how to cross over its river.
The seven Rishis and the celestial Rishi, overwhelmed with grief and fear, began to breathe in pain.
Having thus told Rāma, the mighty sage Kumbhasambhava began another discourse.
At one time the sky looks transparent and at another opaque. It is covered with clouds in certain places like a still sea being obstructed by hills here and there.
And thinking thus, the son of Hridika retired from battle. What shall I say to that mighty car-warrior when meeting him in battle?
Then those two heroes, desirous of averting the danger, endeavoured hard. Those foremost among men then fought with other warriors that were intent on fighting them.
Having been forgiving formerly, why do you not forgive today? O wise man, cast off your sin and obtain victory where virtue is.
Beholding Satvata in that battle, O monarch, stand like a mountain immovable and unshaken although assailed with shafts.
The three Vedas, the science of Fire and all sacrifices with presents are destroyed when a king is careless.
Others, who were present there said to that king of kings-"There is no sacrifice like the Yajna of King Yudhishthira.
There are some men who derive benefit from what is not beneficial. And he, that is engaged in the acquisition of wealth, never acquires happiness.
The sharp dart, the size of a palm and made of iron with an ivory handle was quickly uprooted by (Arjuna's) son; he caught it in his two hands and broke it into pieces.
That wretch, having been thus dragged by me, was thrown down from the car; but why then do you not applaud my feat?
That best of kings, Bhima, desirous of having children and versed in the duty proper to him (his office), gratified that highly effulgent prince with honours. Pleased with his attentions, Damana granted him a boon for himself and his wife; three large richlyendowed sons of great renown who should be jewels among girls.
The sun said : There is no doubt that the ascetic, who had followed this vow of fasting on every seventh day, has attained heaven with his friend wind.
Thereupon, O king, the lord of Yakshas (Kubera), being enraged stopped that mighty car-warrior Bharadvaja (Drona) who was rushing furiously like a sea agitated by storm.
Having placed hundreds and thousands of heroes, who have been slain in battle by other heroic warriors, on cars drawn by Apsaras those women proceeded.
The Earth, the Sky, the Firmament, Water and Air-the fifth (Element), these are the five elements of all creatures. What is there for you then to be afraid?
I do not find any other way of saving you, save by my bending the knee and asking for your pardon.
He saw that the arrows shot by Bharadvaja's son, being whirled in circles and falling down on earth.
Thereupon, the lord of Sachi (Indra) without being enraged at him who was thus running away from his side began to strike him with a Kulisha that had been loosened off and taken up in haste.
The large chest of that monkey broke open and thereupon the monkeys with a great delight began to dance.
Then the son of that one, who was furnished with fearful weapons, cut off his head from its trunk by means of three arrows resembling snakes having their fangs out.
That perpetuator of the Bhrigu race (Vyasa) offered oblations in honour of those Rishis and saw Charvaka. He prevented him from following his purpose (of going away).
He who takes food without having first offered it into the fire, is said to be guilty of stealing. That man also steals whose share one eats after making a division among all members in his family,
O king, his wish of living was still strong. Mice and cats were gnawing at that tree which had white flowers on it.
And, ordering the Rishi Vasistha speedily bring his mother (here), he quickly went before.
O fair damsel, I am the lord and the protector of this whole kingdom. And in strength there is no one equal to me on earth.
The Kauravas, being thus pursued by the Panchalas and their allies, took up various kinds of weapons quickly.
He (Ravana) took up the second of those four means and by words he divided all these monkeys.
This is a great and highly powerful thing, which has the merit of producing fame. The learned call it speech; in this all the universe rests; those who are conversant with it become immortal.
Beholding his heart thus, the king was filled with grief; and he trembled all over in fear.
Without accepting immortality, tell me what is in your mind. Thereupon I spoke with joined hands and my thoughts were fixed on weapons.
When that fearful battle was being fought, the sky looked beautiful with its clouds and meteors.
Having performed a hundred Rajasuya sacrifices for subjugating foes and enemies, Mitra attained the state of Varuna.
Shuka said : Being thus addressed, O king of gods, I bowed my head and welcomed him. He was already known by me as a god in consequence of the asceticism that he practised (in his previous birth).
O great king, the lord of day had come for taking away Karna's ear-rings knowing Mahendra's desire.
When one is not disturbed by the absence of those objects which he enjoyed in his former life, there can be no sorrow for him.
O descendant of the Kākutstha, this arrow was created when Mahesvara lay down on ocean. He is invisible even for all creatures and he cannot be seen by celestials or Asuras; therefore it should not be wonder that such an excellent weapon has been made. It has been produced through anger against a wicked man in order to destroy him along with Madhu and Kaikeya at the time they were killing all Raksasas out of their enmity towards them. The purpose for which he had brought into existence three worlds was fulfilled by destroying those two brothers with his help (of that arrow). Having killed Mahaņdhu thus, that foremost of arrows did what was done by Madhukațabhas as also other beings for enjoyment of men."
O mighty-armed one, at the command of that king (Yudhishthira), Bhimasena sent forth many messengers having accomplished all works.
Beholding his father thus slain, the highly powerful Bhimasena became exceedingly enraged. He then began to slaughter and kill one after another of those men who were coming up in haste from all sides.
Vaishampayana said : Having gone round the Earth, that horse coming back and facing eastward, O king, went towards Varanasa.
And Virata and Drupada both equal in warlike prowess to Bhishma or Drona, O you of mighty arms; also the conch called Shankha (by Arjuna), and that highly powerful son of Dlimba.
None of the celestials and Danavas accept their presents. For this reason, it is said that such persons are generally considered as not entitled (to any reward).
Piercing through the breasts of Rākṣasas, and covered with blood from them, they leapt down on the ground like snakes jumping out of a heap of dust.
According to the command of Dhritarashtra, we will all go together to Varnavata which is a charming city abounding in people.
Sanjaya said There came a Rakshasa of great strength, red-eyed and with coppery neck. His belly was very lean; his hair stood erect on end (in consequence of fear); he had the smell of musk in him and he had long ears like those of an elephant. He also had a nose that resembled a hook and mighty arms.
Bhishma said : When the great Vasistha thus spoke, Indra of immeasurable energy became highly pleased.
Then that mighty-armed and fierce Bhima, resembling the wind in his speed of action, consoled all those (cowherds) as well as his brothers. He said-'As Garuda, the foremost among birds, consoles Vinata's son so will I comfort you.'
Chandrakanta, like the celestials city of Indra is called so because it was built in a land (of Malavali) covered with sandal trees.
That ascetic, who has no fixed residence and takes shelter under trees and stones; that Yogi, who always lives in forests and mountains without any fire for cooking his food; he is truly a man of renunciation.
Then those of us, armed with spears and clubs and darts and bows and arrows rushed towards the place. And remaining in the sky by hundreds we began to slaughter that host of monkeys; and then having destroyed them all we caused a terrible downpour of rocks from heaven which brought about their destruction like death itself."
There is no love for men who are gifted with knowledge, who have mastered the scriptures and who have acquired tranquillity of soul. The attachment which one has in water flowing through lotus leaves disappears when it flows into other places.
There, as they stood on the banks of that sacred lake filled with lotuses and other aquatic plants, those highly fortunate persons were addressed by various Apsaras wearing yellow dresses.
Once on a time, he had gone into the forest. And seeing an animal there in that deep wood, he struck it with his arrows and pursued after it as fast as possible.
Thereupon the powerful and angry sun, whose face had been turned towards the earth on account of his anger for seeing Bhava (Shiva) walking about in human form, again looked at that child with its original countenance.
Let all of you stand here and see how I shall prevent the Sauvira king with his troops from fighting.
O descendant of Bharata, there are none among them who can be called Kshirapras (the milkmen). They have no sons and their race is being gradually destroyed by the death of every one.
Many singers and reciters of the Vedas, each attired in a beautiful robe with ear-rings set with gems came there every morning after their bath.
What evil deed had I performed in my former life, that you have forsaken me today and also yesterday with your friends?
Thereupon the bull, having cut off with hundreds of keen arrows sent by those warriors and shot without any hesitation.
Rise up, O foremost of men! Be ready for helping those that seek your protection and also the members of this family.
The wise man who does not give way before the insult of others, enjoys happiness like a person enjoying nectar. He is ever happy and sleeps well; but he that gives away his mind becomes worthless (by being miserable).
Motion is wind; the sky and space are empty (void); heat is fire, water is fluid. And earth forms a combination with these five elements in the body which has been constituted of those fivefold principles.
The sacred Pushkara, that is named after the Grandfather Brahman himself and which is dear to all Rishis, ascetics and Siddhas belonging to the Vaikhanasa order.
And having fitted his bowstring, he shot at Arjuna and Keshava three hundred arrows with Vasudeva in them; and a thousand shafts also into the son of Pandu.
Then Arjuna, twanging his Gandiva bow and dancing in the chariot created a net-work of arrows over the sky, all round as well as above.
O king, then enraged in battle the son of Hridika (Kritavarman) rushed with impetuosity against that mighty car-warrior Yajnasena.
Hearing of the flight of those ascetics and seeing them before him, he (Duryodhana) went up to Yudhishthira and related everything that had taken place.
The two heroes, who had become enemies and desired each other's death, struck at one another with shafts of fully expanded feathers.
Sacrifices, study of the Vedas and gifts are Yoga; asceticism is truthfulness; patience is forgiveness. The eighth path called Alobha (absence of cupidity) leads one to virtue.
And the Rakshas and Pishachas, united together, began to roar; and there blew cold winds; but yet did not the sun burn.
Thereafter the intelligent Vishvamitra cursed Saraswati, saying that for a year she shall be covered with blood.
Behold, O Vāli! today by the sharp arrows resembling serpents in activity I have slain him like a mountain.
Then the sky will be shorn of all its luminaries and also the sun, moon and stars. The earth shall appear with her mountains levelled down and water dried up; the trees and creepers and shrubs shall fall, as well as the sea itself shall vanish away in consequence of my act of destruction for which I am under compulsion by Destiny (Kala). The kings shall not hand over Sītā into your hands at this moment, O son of Sumitrā! You may then behold my prowess."
O king of men, I had been deceived by a snake. I killed him in anger and for that sin have I taken upon myself this form as a Rakshasa."
Hearing the words of the celestials, the ascetic replied, “I shall do what you wish and give great happiness to men."
Wise men, who are free from anger and other passions, contented with knowledge, self-controlled and endowed with patience, do not grieve in adversity or rejoice at prosperity.
O child, do not stand in battle and eat up the weak. Do you not regard yourself as a powerful one devouring your feeble foes like fire burning down a helpless object?
He who is afflicted by love, has to undergo many a distress and great calamities; he is drowned in the ocean of his own mind.
Then Bhimasena, in rage desirous of slaying the latter's son, hurled at that fierce bow furnished with a razor-edged string and resembling the infant sun himself. It was adorned on all sides by gems and jewels;
Beholding that huge body, the son of Raghu was exceedingly astonished; and pacifying all the monkeys he said to Vibhishana.
Vasishtha said : From such ignorance and from serving the ignorant, one goes through innumerable births.
The highly powerful Kumbhakarna with his trident cut off the branches and uprooted trees on those mountains.
They who regard the old and young as worthy of respect, they that have knowledge of penances or science.
Bhima said Devala had once told me that there are three luminaries called men, viz., the son, act and knowledge. From these creatures have originated all living beings in this world
Having conquered Rāvana in battle with his whole army, let me go back to my city and enjoy victory.
Nahusha was a wicked man and became in consequence of his sin, like Brahma. Agastya cursed him; therefore he is lost for ever from the world.
Men learned in knowledge, well-behaved, intelligent, obedient of superiors and self-controlled and behaving properly are all the characteristics of a Brahmana.
You should avoid those who are not believers, and have lost their sense of shame; who are cruel and sinful. Seek the company of pious men with the help of your knowledge.
All men, being attached to their sons and wives and other kinsmen are plunged in sorrow like elephants withered by the heat of summer.
Then all the heroic sons of Pritha, viz., Yudhamanyu and Shikhandin and the son of Draupadi (Dhristadyumna), and also those mighty car-warriors called Prabhadrakas began to oppress Karna.
And Satyaki, baffling her weapons with his own illusion (of arms), slew that Asura with sharp arrows; and it appeared wonderful.
O best of the Bharata race, thus covered with a shower of arrows, that hero (Arjuna) looked like the mid-day sun.
Having spent their time in various ways, they all became blessed by good fortune. They then took up their abode in the city of Dharma and began to perform three sacrifices which were exceedingly hot like fire and whose energy was very great; these three men were regarded as Agni's sacrificial fires (in those rites).
For this reason, O king of great intelligence and effulgence, those two high-souled ones did not say anything (against your plan). They knew that you had resolved upon doing it.
Having the quality of simplicity, they are contented; having faith in knowledge, and certainty about what is proper for them. They have seen with their own eyes duties which others can only know through inference or tradition. Their souls are pure, and they believe in both good and bad fortune as being due to providence.
That army, then having its cars and horses scattered over the field; filled with men and elephants; furnished with rent coats of mail or armour torn by arrows; deprived of arms and bows; being thus surrounded on all sides (by hostile forces) fled away in all directions like a herd of elephants chased through a forest.
There is no other sin for a Kshatriya than running away from battle. You Kurus, there is none else who can reach heaven but through fighting with enemies."
He quickly killed his enemy's steeds, all of whom were fleet as the mind and light in motion like a wind.
O foremost of kings, I wander in the sky like a crow. Behold how wide is our distance as that between Meru and mustard-seed.
He (Drona) hurled a broad-headed arrow, whetted on stone and resembling the snake that is without its slough.
Vaishampayana said : Having heard this from the Brahmana of rigid vows, all those mighty sons of Kunti became greatly pleased.
O Brahmana, I never eat meat. As a mark of my observance of the vow of abstention from flesh I always fast and at night also I take only one meal;
Thereafter, the son of Drona slew those (Pandava) warriors who had been first killed by divine influence and also those that were slain afterwards. Thus he terrified all creatures with his loud roars.
The fruit of your former virtuous deeds has been exhausted, for you have committed sin by doing what is censured and what will do no good.
O son of Gandhari, you should not be angry with the Pandavas. You should make peace; listen to these words which I say and do them as they are told by me."
And hymned with praises and eulogised by the Sutas, Agastyas and bards they stood surrounded on all sides by their own troops like so many Suns covered over with clouds.
All creatures are dying and the immortality of the gods has been established. O mighty-armed hero, all these great objects have their basis in you (as it were).
I shall install these two in my kingdom. Do you make all necessary arrangements for their reception. The spot where those two wielders of the bow will live, must be charming and without any obstacle or hindrance; they should also derive great pleasure from it.
Then looking at him, Sahasātika pierced the king with many keen arrows and also cut off his bow. Thus wounded, he fled away in great speed towards the side of the forest.
And appearing like the two clouds dispelling darkness, they both came up together and the wielder of Gandiva (Arjuna) and Keshava (Krishna),
For sixty thousand years he lived on air, and his eyes became like lotus leaves.
Narada said : Galava, the son of Vinata thus spoke smilingly. "By good luck I see you here today. O twice-born one."
If one performs his duties as a householder, or if he renounces them for seeking Brahma (the Supreme Soul), and does what is right in the way of acquiring virtue with due regard to his strength, then, whatever be the state which people may fall into on account of their weakness in this world of change, such a person becomes purified by thinking of Brahman.
Then with one shaft, that son of Pandu-Nakula-cut-off the leg and then his other brother Bhimasena cut off in anger with a keen dart.
And thus greatly delighted with the sight of animals, kine and wealth (of various kinds), they beheld Yajñavāt. The monarchs were struck with astonishment at what they saw.
And everything was furnished with every mark; and all things were duly worshipped. Everything there appeared as if it had been created for the sake of sport.
Month, fortnight, day and night are the seasons. Those versed in medicine consider year as an entrance into a new cycle of life.
My jewels, my divine earrings and the celestials, Yakshas, Maharsis always try by various means for making me give up this life.
Having defeated those Gandharvas, O Kākutstha, live in that excellent city of the Gandharbas with a cheerful heart. That region is not inaccessible; it appears delightful even to you; I do not tell you anything which may be disagreeable to you.
The sun did not shine and the wind did not blow in that battle.
O Madhava, it is due to your high birth and loyalty towards me that you are my friend. It is also for the sake of friendship with our preceptor that I consider you as a brother; it is again through attachment which arises out of prowess and lineage that I feel affection for you. For these reasons do you perform such feats according to your strength.
Jarita said : Here is a cave in the side of this tree. Do you enter into it speedily; there will be no fear for you here.
When the thirteenth year will be over, I shall give you weapons and O ruler of men, bring all the sons of Pritha under your subjection.
Then going to the fourth Shala, you will find a palace completely furnished. And at its gate make large presents of wealth.
O child, those two highly powerful brothers Rāma and Lakşmana as well as the priest competent in his office are all worthy of being honoured.
The car of the bowman Chitrasena, on which his monarch was seated in battle, began to be struck with wonder and utter "Alas!"
In the rites of Agni, no fire is required. The milk which men drink on earth belongs to them who have not as yet attained manhood.
That hero, O king, showing his strength in the battle field and displaying it even like a tiger rending an elephant with its claws.
And Vaidehī's desire is, that you place on the foremost seat covered with excellent cloths and adorned with various gems.
This, O son, is the fruit of virtue in men, viz., their parents being pleased with them and all their affairs coming under one view.
O sinless one, all these acts of mine have been done with the intention of following Kshatriya duties.
You are a man; but I am an irresistible lion. This world belongs both to you and me, O Rishi!
And where the highly blessed Rāma, of Bhrigu's race and great austerities conquering the earth many times over vanquishing its foremost Kșatriyas.
Those foremost of men having bathed, waited upon the Sun. And Rāma approached that Brahmana who was engaged in adoring him with his excellent disciples; and Ravī (the sun) had gone down behind the mountain and so O Rama go you where there is water for bathing.
O fool, this is the fruit of your desire which you have obtained in consequence of killing me who was transformed into a deer and whom you had intoxicated with wine.
And those two fair breasts, with their beautiful ornaments on them and of excellent complexion, looked like a couple of round hills covered over by the rays (of the moon).
Thereupon taking up another bow, O best of the Bharata race, that slayer of hostile heroes viz., Hari.
Thus that worshipful person (Shuka) had described the extent of water and he also said that fire and wind, even with all their strength together cannot overcome this description.
And the people shall be cruel in nature and they will hate each other. All men shall become vicious at the close of Yuga.
Those creatures which are born from the womb, when they come out of it and become separate beings utter loud cries like children. Being hungry after birth in the same way as infants cry for their mother's breast, those animals seek food according to their kind with a desire similar to that felt by parents towards their own offspring.
He will see Karna, and also the son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu), as well as Draupadi with her five sons; he will behold his father-in-law Vidura, his brothers,
They who wish not for water from the field where there is no rain, should be cursed by all people in such a way that they may never get any benefit out of it.
Then that hero, O Bharata, taking up his mace and rushing towards the mighty car-warrior Keshava in battle, began to strike Partha with it.
The great Rishi Vasistha said that it was impossible. But we are able, somehow or other, to carry out the sacrifice (that you have prescribed).
Beholding them thus broken, Dhananjaya (Arjuna), with his voice muffled by the sound of arrows, shot at those warriors numerous shafts resembling snakes.
Yudhishthira said Having been born as a human being, and having obtained an object which is difficult of attainment in the world, what should be done by one who desires his own good, O grandfather?
Beholding the army thus slaughtered, king Yudhishthira of Dhritarashtra's race said in anger to his own troops "Why do you not kill these enemies?”
O king, at the words of that one (Arjuna), they all turned away from Shvetavahana. And though fatigued and exhausted their armour and bows were not relaxed.
Yudhishthira said If a Kshatriya, from every side injures the Brahmanas; who will save him? What is his duty and what refuge should he seek.
Saying, “You are my mother,” he said again to me in return,-“Go you forth with a cheerful heart like the highly effulgent Durvasa or Agni when burning. This is your resolution as regards these Brahmanas.” Having thus spoken that child of mine disappeared then and there.
You should accept with patience, the happy or unhappy events of your life whether they are agreeable or disagreeable.
The sky became clear and the rumbling of thunder was heard. Lightning flashed, clouds appeared in all directions; there then began a violent downpour with showers of rain.
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and one who knows them are three. The incitement to act is also of these three kinds (viz., acts done in ignorance), those that are done knowingly but with a wrong aim) and those which are done for pious ends).
Thereupon, descending from his car decked with gold and again standing on it, he (Ravana) began in an instant to encompass the earth and sky and all points of the compass by virtue of Maya.
Then I began to think of the goddess Sarasvati in my mind. And that question which had come into my mind was as if it were butter churned out from a milking vessel.
Vishnu is the soul of all things and therefore He should be adored in everything. The life-breath which leaves a man when he sleeps, becomes then the soul (of his body).
Leaving the city of Kaśi, that covetous one went out for sport; and taking a poisoned dart he set about hunting.
Thereupon the monarch thus spoke, O you versed in the Vedas. Do you soon summon Sumantra and also those other priests conversant with all branches of learning,-Suyajna, Vamadeva, Jābali, Kaśyapa, Purohita Vasistha as well as others learned among Brāhmaṇs.
The illustrious Bharadvaja, thus commanded by the Rishis Vasistha and others, addressed king Bharata in these words.
Drona said : I am very much pleased with that first speech of Bhishma, the son of Shantanu. You should therefore act according to his advice in such a way as not to provoke Arjuna against yourself and bring about war between him and Duryodhana.
And they were striking each other with clenched fists and knees; and drawing, pushing away (each other) by means of their arms.
There was a fountain in the midst of that forest, surrounded with creepers and grasses.
With his arrows Partha caused the ranks of the Kauravas to be broken, confused and contracted.
Hearing those words, fraught with wrath and trembling lips, the king again addressed them thus:-"Denied by you, O illustrious ones, I shall go elsewhere. Be blessed, ye ascetics!
As I have been directed by my father in days of yore, so do I now serve him with all care and attention.
Having been disguised as a couple of Raurava ascetics, the Pandavas, in great distress and with their bodies covered with barks of trees came out.
The Wind-god's son Hanumān, delighted at Laks manaņa's words, gave him a large branch of Chandana tree laden with blossoms.
When that time of destruction comes, the destroyer himself is incapable of resisting it; as when a razor-sharp blade approaches one's body and cuts off his head. As mountains have an immense size in comparison with human beings so that period has an immeasurable greatness compared with the present day.
The boy, who was so careful about our food and the animals we rode upon as also of the beds that were provided for us and ornaments which adorned us in battle.
O lord of Rākşasas, I see hair on the head when he is awake. And seeing that (Rama) asleep and yet possessed by consciousness,
The son of Taraka said : O gentle lady, what is the good for man in this world? And how can one get it without falling from his own duties. Tell me everything about yourself and I shall do all that you may command; let not my self-abandonment be seen by others or my departure from righteousness be known to them.”
The Brahmanas are always in need of many articles for the support and comfort of their bodies, such as horses and other animals which form a means by that class. Those men who ride on these horses or use them otherwise acquire merit through those creatures. They also become freed from sin.
Through the curse of Mandavya, Dharma has lost his former splendour. He is now possessed by a great mind and powerful Yoga powers; he is high-souled and highly intelligent.
The earth looked beautiful with many-headed kings having faces like lotuses and eyes resembling the rising moon, wearing golden diadems on their heads.
Then those excellent steeds of Madhava, resembling silver in colour and fleet as the wind itself soon advanced towards Drona.
Amongst the twice born are those who are learned in medical science; among them, they that have become intelligent and amongst them again he men who can do good to others.
And then proceeding at his pleasure, the king of Kāsari returned again by sea. After that he went along the coast through Vangas and Pundra and Kosala.
What heroes checked the hosts of Virata, and Matsya's son who had come there with a view to slay Drona in battle?
Thereupon king Duryodhana taking up a huge mace of great lustre and with his feet began to walk towards the Pandavas.
We shall not interfere with the will of Dushasana, who without Kunti's consent had carried away Krishna in her hair.
Then the Pandavas, with Karna and other rulers of earth began to live in great friendship.
O lady of fair smiles, having thus found out the truth I am thinking that being childless and without any sons or grandsons I shall not be able to obtain those regions which are so sweet.
The words of that son of Vrishaparva, uttered in anger and which are most horrible; burn my heart like a piece of dry wood set on fire.
And there was seen on the car of Bhima, a mighty vulture having his feathers stained with blood.
Seeing her sons thus, Kunti of truthful speech addressed Yudhishthira with these words.
I know, O Lakşmaņa, these flowers that have been brought by me from the forest and presented (to you) by Vaidehi.
O child, Rāma is everlasting. Your enemies have been killed; and you are endowed with prosperity along with your kinsmen. Do you please Sumitrā as well.'
Who is there that would be a greater fool than myself? I have been roving through other kingdoms and lived like one who has no master. What man of sense will choose his own good when he may enjoy the comforts of others' possessions?”
Even that man who listens with faith and without any malice, is freed from sin; he attains the excellent regions of happiness which are acquired by righteous acts.
On the expiration of that night, Angada with monkeys met together and consulted with those aged monkeys.
That man who renounces both happiness and misery succeeds in attaining Brahma. The wise do not grieve for him.
The adorning of the god with garlands, O foremost one among kings, and also performing such other duties as are ordained by the Vedas.
And as he was thus wandering in that lonely spot, the greatly effulgent sage began to sport with his wife.
Then, bowing his head to Rāma and offering him a seat; Vāli's minister took the fan with its handle made of plaited grass.
How can one cross the ocean by two planks? (Similarly) how can a weak person subdue a powerful enemy without having acquired any skill in arms? Such is Karna, who wishes to fight with Partha. His desires have been frustrated by us for thirteen years like that lion freed from his noose not killing our cattle any more.
That king, who observes such a sacrifice full of every virtue and which continues for one year.
O mighty-armed hero, perform this difficult feat for the sake of your brother. I have never said so before; therefore no one else than you can do it.
Like sacrificial animals he then slew those who were in agitation, and their hair standing on end. Taking up a sword with three edges, he killed them all separately.
If I abandon Duryodhana, what will be the consequence? Indeed he may kill all my sons.
The five winds called Udana, Pranava, Samana and Vyana as also the one that originates from the act of speaking are found in every living creature.
Thereupon, O king, coming out of his palace and with a mind for slaying the hostile army he proceeded towards his camp.
The illustrious one creates the universe by changing his own form. For there is nothing which could not be reached, nor anything from whence it would originate again.
The heroic Shalva, my husband, is in our thoughts. You should not give away your sister unwillingly (to any other person).
The royal saints also have a heavenly region assigned them; and this is their duty. As from the full vessel water drops down on all sides,
The person who is influenced by desire, the one that wishes to make profit out of others, and he who indulges in anger or any other passion with his mind only; and also they whose deeds are marked by cruelty-these six kinds of men do not show their respect even for those whom they have already gained.
By giving assurance of safety in battle, by saving those who are desirous of living and by rescuing from danger the aged men as also boys belonging to the regenerate castes I shall acquire great fame which is very desirable for me. Know that my life itself has been consecrated (to this purpose).
Having gone round several times in various ways and having made a complete circuit, that brave son of Dhritarashtra's eldest brother was once more seen by Bhima.
Bibhatsu (Arjuna) also pleased Virata with his singing and dancing, as well as all the ladies of Antehpu.
Beholding these deeds of the two, O king, all your warriors were filled with delight and they saw that battle which was unparalleled in this world.
Then O mighty monarch, Kritavarma the Satvata prince and Shrutayusha of Kamboja race began to oppose Dhananjaya.
The son of Pandu with his arrows cut-off the standards, chariots and horses yoked thereto; bowmen, car-warriors, drivers and flag-staffs.
Without his brother, Kumbhakarna the mighty son of Rāvana became like a mountain with many springs overflowing in blood.
O monarch, the great king Drupada had once acted thus towards us. He strengthened our party and defeated his own enemies in battle.
O great ascetic, all my weapons have been lost and the arrows destroyed.
Having withstood this force, Jaya-datha can by no means be vanquished. All these men have resolved upon laying down their lives for the sake of Sindhu's son.
Then taking up that rod which is incapable of being destroyed, he cut down the Asura and all his weapons.
No other rulers of the earth will be able to accomplish what you have, O best of Kuru's race, accomplished by your exertions.
O mighty monarch, those two (heroes) began to discharge their arrows towards one another and the battle that took place between them was as wonderful as an encounter in a deep sea.
And I think that you will grant us our request, since we are your slaves and have not the least cause of pride in ourselves.
Those two heroes, Keshava and Arjuna always shine with the lustre of a flame or fire (for they are) effulgent as the sun. They were ever accompanied by the wind, moon and Agni and their strength was great like that of the rays emanating from a burning lamp. Like Brahma and Mahadeva those two heroes sat on one chariot, both being equally powerful and having all creatures for their servants;
Thereupon approaching the great god Brahman, who was present there as a witness of all things and holding up their joined hands they said these words.
Shalya said Thus addressed Nahusha became very much pleased and the king of the gods thus spoke again to that blameless lady.
Thereupon the Brahmanas bowed down to those words uttered by him (Arjuna). Then all, headed by Vasishtha and coming out from within that car of king Yudhishthira, paid their adorations.
I am going to take up a burden upon myself. You should be able to bear it." It is proper for you always to do my bidding, and not act in vain.
You will be again employed in the work (of ruling your kingdom). In the meantime, Partha and his brothers of tranquil minds engaged in the works of war and amassing wealth.
And those men who shall stay by you during that night, even they will become invulnerable and ever protected from the shower of dust.
Having sent away your wrath, and drunk up all the water in my cup you should with confidence take me. There is no sin on my side.”
O sire, seeing his troops slaughtered by Yuyudhana (Krishna), Drona himself rushed against Satyaki of true prowess.
Hearing the words of that Rishi, and intending to perform his evening rites. (Rāma) cheerfully proceeded towards a beautiful asylum abounding in Apsarás; there he bathed himself with water and performed the evening rite. And then having entered into the hermitage belonging to the high-souled Kumbhayoni.
I have obtained the permission of those two best physicians, Ashvins who are possessed of all accomplishments.
After this, for nineteen days your son had desired victory. O Gandhari do you pray for my safety when I shall be fighting with the enemies! Having been thus addressed by me at proper times and having said so yourself on several occasions; "Where there is virtue, victory will follow," what other words did you say? Are those not true which you then spoke in reply to myself? Remembering these very words of yours spoken while I was speaking mine, how can it be that you are now acting contrary thereto?"
Thereupon the high-souled kings decided that if it was really true, O king, then let us bring Shikhandin back with Panchala's daughter as her husband and another king who should be installed in place of Drupada.
The whole of this battle is marvellous. When Karna was slain, all the warriors thought that they had been saved; but when Phalguna (Arjuna) saw him fallen on earth.
Go there, O blessed one. Speak these words of mine to him; and then bowing down your head to that old ascetic who is firm in his vows, say this.
Thereupon that scion of the Dasharha race, in that battle cut off with arrows numerous shafts shot by Drona and also his bow endowed with great effulgence.
The body of the king was seen blazing like that (fire) which is produced at the end of a Yuga and consumed by fire.
After Kausalyā, the queen Sumitra's face was never cheerful; and her countenance had been always bathed in tears.
Then Bhimasena went with the wise Stupatis in front of him and also leading all those Brahmanas who were well versed in performing sacrifices.
Prativindhya is the son of Yudhishthira, Sutasoma that of Vrikodara. Shrutakirti and Satanika are sons of Arjuna; Nakula has got Shrutanikita as his son. The four other warriors have been born by Kunti in her old age. They all excel Krishna (in every respect).
Markandeya said : O king, the beloved wife of Agni became very much pleased and she gave birth to a son who was called Pavaka. He is also known as the lord of all creatures on earth by those that call him their soul or master of this world (the supreme being).
This arrow, O enemy of your enemies is incapable being baffled by you. With this do you slay the king Lavaņa, 0 gentle one.
These are the names of those rivers, O king as they have been known in times past.
The man who is desirous of acquiring wealth should never do any harsh deed. He may, however, by his own power perform all acts and acquire riches without ever thinking about their consequences.
Vrikodara, the mighty armed son of Pandu having his hand held by Bhimasena with that one (of Ravana's), was much displeased.
O descendant of Raghu, having endured such a grief on my account, he again meet with misery for I have come here.
Having ordered that hero (to go), and having worshipped him, she was dismissed by the king; but even thus did not vanish.
There are many sorts of illusions, and they have been laid down in the scriptures. Those that know ancient history declare war as sinful (in all circumstances).
It is adorned with gold and it abounds in beautiful gems. The celestials, Gandharvas and other heavenly beings live there. None can measure its length or breadth; none can enter into it who are guilty of sins.
Knowing his renown, bravery and victory in battle we have come here. Nor did any of us ever suspect Subala's son (Yudhishthira).
And he had not the least sense of his own superiority. His tongue was exceedingly talkative and very abusive also, but you were able to endure him without any irritation at all.
O Rāma, when the high-souled Sugriva is liberated (by me), it will be a great misfortune for both of us and he will have his fame destroyed forever. Therefore I am so quickly taking him away from here; And this monkey host divided into parts by my might in the meantime being thus encouraged I cheer up those that are disheartened.
That field of battle, being covered with Bhimasena and Karna and Drona's son and Parshata (Satyaki) and Satyaki itself looked like the rising sun.
Whatever the Siddhas wish for is granted them. Therefore, casting off all your difficulties and exerting yourself in asceticism do what you desire to have.
O Bhishma, the king will not find out a superior virtue in him. Therefore you should approve of my conduct towards this prince (Yudhishthira).
O Partha, it is for the sake of Satyaki that I am all disheartened and my eyes are always fixed on Dhananjaya.
Those shafts, discharged by him as they fell (on the enemy) did not at all cause any injury. They appeared like showers of rain falling on a mountain top.
O best of men, having thus censured my mother I have today saved our father from the sin which was about to overtake him.
Others, living in the house and observing Brahmacharya (life of celibacy), are seen as stars in heaven.
O good man, do you take me and accomplish my request. I am determined not to live without your company; therefore it is better that we should die together."
And do you know that which is superior to all Mantras, the nature of wealth and virtue. Do then trust him as your father.
Having seen their army routed by the Satvata (Krishna) and Arjuna, I think that your sons are now lamenting.
As the daughter of Savitri (Sarasvati) did not desert her husband, Yajnaseni (Draupadi), as also Partha's wife in consequence of virtue, so Meru's lustre was never lost.
Again, with cruel Rakshasas and the monkeys (for his followers), that foremost of monkeys went joyfully accompanied by thousands of children and aged people.
Then those men said to that slayer of the Samsaptakas, “We are all your servants; we are all subject to you."
Bilvās, Marandas and Asanas, Shamyaghras and Vibhitakas were made by the energy of Bharadvaja.
I always live among the twice-born who are given up to studies, among Kshatriyas engaged in agriculture and among Vaishyas who are devoted to virtue; while as regards Shudras they are ever engaged in serving me.
As that blameless lady, afflicted with grief and bereft of her joy, came along in a state of dejection, he saw auspicious omens around him like those who are favoured by good fortune.
And resembling the moon surrounded by stars, that king of kings appeared in his chariot decked with blue cloth and looking like a mass of white clouds.
Some of the warriors, when they were engaged with each other in battle and had their weapons wounded by Karna.
O king, for securing the merit of heaven you should make gifts in all circumstances.
Vaishampayana said Having thus spoken, the king lay down on the ground in grief. Then there came a learned Brahmana named Shaunaka who was versed both in Yoga and Sankhya philosophy;
O king, Krishna is the cause of all those heroes; and victory depends on him.
Neither father, nor son, nor self, neither mother, nor friend or compeer is one's husband in this world. In the next life only he acquires a wife who has been married according to religious rites and with due regard for her own family honour.
Freed from the illusion of the energy, he blazed forth with his own energy and lighted up all directions. Then Arjuna cut-off Vritra's head as Indra had done before by means of a thunderbolt.
They have been so far misled by the desire of wealth, as if they were angry at each other. And now knowing this (state), those that are wise and virtuous among them will renounce it altogether.
O descendant of Bharata, why does this hawk range among the female deer like a male? I shall soon catch him. Do you try for his liberation."
Riding on Airavata, the lord of all the celestials was accompanied by his followers. Shakra himself never stood in battle before him without having been prepared first (for war).
He quickly pierced Satyaki with a hundred shafts. Thus wounded by the strong son of your, that wielder of the bow (Satyaki),
Quickly shall Kākutstha come here, surrounded by the best of monkeys; and he who has vanquished you in conflict will remove your sorrow.
How shall I see you all who are accustomed to eat food brought by others, and how those undeserving wretches of the race of Dhritarashtra?
O son of Vrishadraja, he is at liberty for going away from us; what has been done by him does not suit our dignity. We are capable of protecting the religion and we lead a pious life.
How can we act properly, how shall we get rid of our sins? What are the paths that lead us on and what is truth (to be followed) by men living in this world.
O foremost of monkeys, do you once more consider what is proper for the achievement of this object.
The body of the enemy, which had been a thousand times as big as his own person, was instantly cut off into ten thousand pieces with those shafts.
Approaching the palace, that one knowing wealth said,-"I have been told by you." And he thus addressed me in sweet words.
You are the master of food, but you do not wish to feed me who am your guest and desirous of enjoying a meal.
Vaishampayana said : Having been thus addressed by their preceptor the Brahmanas fled away in fear of Pandavas on all sides.
This shaft, difficult of being received by the body and terrible in its force is hurled from a mighty weapon. The vow has been performed; I have satisfied my preceptor's wish as also that of our friends who are desirous for victory! With this arrow true in aim let you slay Karna today." Thus did Dhananjaya speak and then discharged at him an awful arrow for his death.”
Ignorant people of little intelligence, and without knowledge of the Self or with no austerities, go (in this world) thus. All things are established on Intelligence.
O foremost of men, what you see here is this mountain-like mass of clouds resembling the peak of Kailasa. And these are the Asuras which belong to that high-souled one who bears the name Naraka and whose form resembles a hill.
There are monkeys equal and superior (to me) in that forest, but none is my peer except Sugriva.
Reminding him of the wicked counsels which he had given, Bhima also spoke harsh words in the midst of his friends. He said remembering that Dhritarashtra was under the influence of Gandhari and remembering Duryodhana as a foe and Karna and Dushashana as his enemies he thus
And having worshipped the car with flowers and perfumes of sweet odours, that mighty-armed one addressed Pushpaka saying-"Do you go wherever I desire; forsooth shall your master remember me. Do not grieve like a Siddha (ascetic). Let no misfortune befall you while going in any direction."
The beautiful and broad diadem of Dhananjaya shines brightly. This gem which is as brilliant as the sun, being set in this crown, appears very lovely indeed!
Those ladies saw the highly powerful Rāma seated on a seat of leaves, in company with Sītă and attended by Lakşmana.
Thereupon, O king, other substances were formed from the body of that Rishi. Thus renouncing his body and attaining high asceticism.
The body is burnt by mental afflictions like water in a pot heated over the fire.
Rāma said : O you of high asceticism, I wish to hear the story as told by you why this field was tilled for the Kuru.
O king, in the Kashi country there lived a celebrated monarch named Divodasa, son of Pitrishrava and he was known by the name Harisheva.
As the full moon with his crescent rays spreads lustre over all quarters of the sky, so that best among men displayed in battle an effulgence which was unrivalled and equal only to victory.
O descendant of Kuru, one does not acquire the great object which is beyond conception by means of study or asceticism or sacrifices. Knowing it as existent he acquires that greatness (of knowledge).
Hearing these harsh words of his father, the king Shveta was filled with anger and went away to the Kailasa hill where he practised rigid austerities for many years. With subdued soul, regulated vows and selfcontrol, O monarch, living on fasts alone, that best of kings worshipped Mahadeva (Shiva).
Having saluted Brahma, and joined her hands together in respect before him, she thus spoke to the lord of all creatures. “O Lord! for what purpose have I been created?
Then, O son I shall close the opening of this hole with a piece of cloth. Thus do I consider as my counter part that which is flaming in its waters (the fire within).
'Oh, oh! What is this? Is it my own wish or is it an illusion of the mind? How can I be mistaken in such a matter as has no relation with myself?'
Thereupon Durmukha having pierced Shrutakarman with seven arrows, cut off his standard and also the latter's charioteer by means of another seven.
His arms and legs were stretched; his mouth was wide open like that of a vulture. And roaring, he ran towards Rāma as the moon runs in space.
O king, remembering the wonderful conversation between Keshava and Arjuna I am again filled with joy.
The wind that blew was mixed with rain and it became cold. It seemed as if the clouds were raining stones which created fear in all hearts.
Then in the thick of that dust, those two—Rāma and Ravana-angry with each other did not see one another.
Then the son of Bharadvaja, that great car-warrior Drona with his sons and disciples all desirous of defeating Arjuna in battle.
Alas, this man has the fickleness of lust! He is still thinking of that virtuous lady who had been so hard to win and whom he has now lost.
The life of a man who abstains from all acts of violence, is ever full of virtue and wealth.
O king, it was resounding with the clatter of horses and steeds; it was filled with the sound made by bells.
In the Tretayuga, all sacrifices should be performed in due order; but if they are not celebrated according to this mode then in Dvapara and Kaliyugas such celebrations lead into great troubles.
The third one of great fame is called Divyavayu, who lives in the region of Brahma and also that of Indra.
The season has arrived and yet I have no husband. What shall happen? How should one act in such a case?
He who having already poured libations on a fire, calls upon the guest for water and other articles of food which are not ready, does so from impatience. Such an act is improper in one that has heard (the Vedas). It should never be done by any one who has not studied them.
Thereupon he beheld Krishna, seated on a high seat adorned with pearls and gold. Her body was as beautiful as the blue sky in appearance.
Janamejaya said : O you who know the meaning of Brahma, that account (of Dhritarashtra's sons) which was given by you about the excellent birth of those Kauravas is not human but superhuman.
That forest, which is like a palace in beauty and splendour of its ornaments, that which has celestial trees bearing fruits all the year round. O Kubera! I want it as my kingdom here on Earth.
Is the virtuous Sumitra, Lakşmaņa's mother and (the middle sister of) that heroic Satrughna free from ailment?
Relying on his strength, he will be contented today. I do not like the meat of that roaring (one).
Vaishampayana said : Having been excited with curiosity, Yudhishthira again asked the high-souled Markandeya in company of his younger brothers.
O king, these are only a half of the subjects. I have spoken more than that; this subject is called Tretāyana and it includes three other branches as well. It contains sacred ordinances which mark out purity in life. That doctrine should be heard from persons conversant with its mysteries. The gods themselves created for our hearing those duties that lead men to virtue and religious merit.
That thirst which cannot be subdued by the wicked, that is not easily overcome even when one tries his best; and that takes away life itself (is called) a great disease. He who has conquered it enjoys happiness."
Bhishma said Listen, O king! As for certain men of righteous souls who are devoted to the practice of penances and acts which have been performed in consequence thereof.
O best of Brahmanas, these holes are constantly made by the celestials and Rakshasa as well as serpents. But they do not get filled up; for there is always a vigilant guard (over them).
Which of them, renouncing directness and uncertainty of signs, shall practise the Religion based on evidence which is certain in relation to kinsmen.
Nakula said The gods and the Agnis are all placed in Vishakha. Therefore, O king, know that they have their abode there; and it is for this reason also that you should perform your sacrifices there.
O great king, the hero Ashvatthaman is still at my command. These all are also mighty car-warriors like celestials themselves;
That illustrious person of resplendent appearance, whose body was pierced with those arrows and which had been cut into many pieces by Karna's weapons. When his car fell down on the earth in that way, it looked like a mighty mountain struck by thunder-bolt; and when he lost consciousness, all his energy vanished away as does solar effulgence at nightfall.
Drona then pierced the son of Vasudeva with five shafts; and Arjuna he struck with seventy-three, and his standard with three.
And it is said that the origin of all things depends on their seeds, and also from the nature which they possess. It further originates from (the principle) called destruction;
I am the protector of all poor and helpless men, women, children and old people; therefore enter into my body.
Where the lord of gods lives, show me that place." Thus addressed by her husband who had come back after a long time.
Then, O Bharata, Dhristadyumna entering the palace saw the son of Panchala lying on his couch with a Shudra woman at his side.
Let this my house be made beautiful with wealth, elephants and horses and chariots; let it have a large number of people in its service and plenty of food.
O great king, having killed one hundred Kekayas and driven them away on all sides Drona stood there like the Destroyer himself with his mouth wide open.
O descendant of Kuru, having been thus ordered by him (Karna), Krishna, Dhananjaya and Bhima were made to eat it.
Are you the science of archery, O best of Brahmanas? Or are you Rama himself or is it Hari with his discus and club in hand that I see before me.
O foremost of ascetics, the kings having arrived there and seeing my daughter coming up from earth in her childhood they asked for that girl. Then all those rulers of men together came to me (for knowing why I refused) and enquired about Virya; but I did not give them a reply as regards their desire (to have the hand of my daughter).
Having arrived at the mountain called Citrakuta and having crossed Mandakini, Rāghava said to that company of ascetics.
Janamejaya said : How did the high-souled, Dasharha race destroy Madhu? What were those motives which led that great one (Krishna) to act thus.
As a lamp, whether it be big or small, is seen by all creatures with the help of its light; so should one understand that Purusha which exists in every creature as being possessed of knowledge.
This Vaikuntha, the lord of all creatures and the bestower of boons (Shakra) is always engaged in performing religious rites. It was for him that Indra vanquished the Asuras; it was through his favour that Satyaki obtained a hundred celestial cars.
Go quickly and burn down the forest; so shall you be freed from your sin. Hearing these words of Parameshthi's son, Agni rose up in his best form (of speed) like a flame which is about to consume anything combustible. He soon came at Khandava and entered it with great force. Then all on a sudden that fire enraged by wind began to blaze furiously.
Above and above these were flaming effulgent ones, which the celestials themselves could not approach.
The vultures, the hawks and jackals will today eat up my flesh; and other persons that are not human beings.
The car, covered with golden cloth and having banners; the charioteer was highly pleased; it had excellent shafts in front of its yoke.
The highly fortunate Rishis again and again spoke thus, “O Dharmasena, all this is due to Savitri's great fortune.”
The vulture said : O ruler of the earth, all creatures come into being from food. They increase and live on it.
Then the monkey-king Indrajit burned down Veshmā's mansion; and Jambumale, Sumalesha's. And then he burnt Rshamiketa's palace, Suryashatra's, Hrasvakarņa's, Dantasa's, Romasha's of terrible deeds, Yudhounnata's, Matta's, Dhvajagreva's, Vidhyujihwa's, Gora's (the terrible), Hastimuka's, Karala's, Vishalas', Shonitaksha's. Kumbhkarna's, Makaraksha's, Narantaaka's Kummbha's Duratman'a, Yajñashatra's Brahmasatura's
Amongst them one was very powerful, he summoned all the kings of earth. He asked for his army and they were present in that battle-field with him.
And from his bow thousands of blazing arrows were discharged, like so many Marīcas at the time of destruction in the Kāla-yuga.
Karna also thought that the Samsaptakas, who were all capable of destroying enemies and who had been engaged for slaying Partha (Arjuna) would be able to kill Dhananjaya in battle.
O Rāghava, I have heard the words of that magnanimous one, who had been deprived by his enemies and whose wife has also been taken away.
If you are fatigued, O king of kings, then go back. I have not been sent by the celestials in a proper way."
Sanjaya said "Having heard these words of the son of Pandu, Bhishma.
And the world became enveloped in darkness, and all objects could not be seen. O king, on account of dust no direction or point was visible.
When the Kauravas were thus fighting with one another and fell down, being slain by their enemies; it was not agreeable to me.
Two swords are by his sides, two lamps on the ground illumine it; and four persons have come here with their hands held up ready for receiving alms.
Having been satisfied with the arrows of that bowman, Bharadvaja's son (Drona), they came back to their own homes like guests coming away from a house after having taken food there.
And he, his body scorched by that dreadful smell and burning all over, spoke thus to the celestial messenger. "You had better go there where are those whose you have come as their ambassador."
Shalya said Thus addressed by Sachi, the illustrious Indra again spoke to her. “This is not a fit time for displaying prowess; and Nahusha is stronger than I."
Go, my son. I permit you; Kaikeyi has given birth to a good child on your behalf and tell (him) that our mother is well as also the king of kings
The bird Vinena said : "O best of birds, tell me the means by which you will be able to protect this helpless and hungry hawk. I shall do it at once but not give you a chicken."
As the illustrious Rāma has restored me my life, do you also speak thus and so attain virtue.
Then Shikhandin cut off the bow and standard of this foe; with three arrows he pierced Karna himself. Thereupon that one of a noble race, deprived of his weapons by Sikhandi's skillful hand, dropped down from grief on the field.
Know that these excellent boons were all obtained by the son of Shauri (Arjuna) before. He was then a god, and wandering in disguise he deluded the world with his illusions.
O best of the Bharata race, even in a month, one cannot fill up an hour which has not been filled; and how can any one live long if he desires to complete that which is incomplete?
Those persons who have been led away from the path of virtue by wicked means, will surely meet with their doom.
By doing such a difficult work with care, one may be successful or one's expenditure may increase and he may die.
I wish, O Bharata! to see those celestial weapons with which you have killed the Nivatakavachas who were powerful.
When the fire is not seen with these eyes, neither the gods nor the departed manes are satisfied. For this there will be a failure of three years' crops.
He who was a Yajvan, a giver of gifts and competent in his profession, he who loved both the city-dwellers and countrymen; O Ashvapati, that king ever devoted himself to the welfare of all creatures.
Bhishma said : Thus addressed by Mahendra, the intelligent and self-controlled ascetic became highly angry. But he then cheerfully accepted the Pushkara (herbs).
My conclusion is that the king ought, out of affection for his sons, make presents to them. The virtuous-minded (king) has not yet done this; he may perhaps see me secretly now and then."
Thus addressed by the ascetic, that best of ladies became confounded and lost all consciousness; and she stood motionless like a stake.
The twice born, who are fond of battle and seek pleasure from it, see that the carnivorous animals will eat up their flesh.
When Savyasachin was thus engaged in his task, Drona with a well-ordered array attacked Yudhishthira.
That man who has no beard, that one whose head is shaved or tonsured; he who sleeps on the ground and goes about without a covering upon his body obtains great merit.
There is nothing on earth, in heaven or among the celestials which has not been created by those three qualities.
Behold my keen arrows, which destroy the enemies and resemble weapons in their energy. They are adorned with gold ornaments.
O Yudhisthira, as regards the number of persons in each order that should live in religious retreats among Brahmanas and those who are learned.
And one who has studied the Sankhya philosophy and all the works on Yoga, O king of kings, regards virtue as a vulgar thing.
One reflects on his own interests; one thinks of virtue. Another does what is necessary for himself and others, Therefore he who follows the middle course between these two kinds of men, has been called Madhyama (middle).
I am not the agent; you are also not so, and none else is an actor O lord of Shachi. Men by turns enjoy their pleasures according as they desire it.
In his sacrifices, the gods do not accept his oblations. The departed manes are displeased with him and his family line is being weakened in consequence of that.
If you do not, O hero, consider this worthy guest as one deserving of your hospitality, then with all my heart shall I perform the duty of entertaining a warrior.
Seeing those thousands of heroic heroes, the sons of mine are certainly pained in their heart.
O ruler of men, the drums are sounding without any reason. The mighty car-warriors among Kshatriyas have all gone out at an improper hour.
I am blessed, O sage! For by coming here and seeing you have given me great happiness. There is none else who can give greater pleasure than this.
Having been called by the Samsaptakas, that powerful one (Drona) advanced towards them and began to make a great slaughter of his enemies in battle.
Why are you looking at me in the Assembly like an ordinary person? I am not here as a mere spectator. Listen, O Rāma, what do I say!
The great bowman, the son of Bhima, shot at them and they too (in return) pierced him with seven shafts each.
O Shuka, you are the best of birds. You have been born from a supernal parentage and as your mother was Daksha's daughter; I therefore ask you why do not leave this tree?
They became fatigued and fell asleep. And the Rākşasi Hidimba came there, while they were all sleeping with their mothers.
Thereupon the lotus-eyed Bhagavan (Keshava) thus spoke to Krishna, "O Krishala there is no proper time for man. I am afflicted with your illness. Therefore speedily go and bring my food." Having said this he took up his seat on a couch of straw which was lying at hand; having taken it in his arms Keshava placed his head upon that piece of straw.
Then, O monarch, Karna, having covered all the points with his arrows and thus baffling Ghatotkacha's aim, began to slaughter those numerous Rakshasas.
O king, other elephants, filled with fear and running away from the field of battle became as if stupefied.
With his hands tied with the snaky tail of a cobra and holding in them an arrow drawn from its string, that dear brother was sent by this eldest one (his elder brother).
Thus living in pleasure, indulging his desires and thus being deluded by pleasures of the senses he does not recognize himself. In this way falling into various wombs again and again as if revolving on a wheel he is born in many births amongst those inferior creatures who are subject to ignorance, deeds and desire.
There was a great noise there, resembling that of the trees in a forest. Some arrows cut off some cars and standards (of other chariots).
Seeing her emaciated and pale, and filled with anxiety the virtuous-minded Vasishtha that best of those who have two feet said.
Dhristadyumna and Satyaki were defeated by Bhima; the words of Yudhishthira also pierced into his very heart.
O Lord, having given away his entire kingdom and all the worlds of heaven with Brahma himself as their king, Ambarisha has obtained the regions of Indra.
Believing that Phalguna was like me, my preceptor thus spoke to Vrikodara (Bhima).
Those heroes, the best of men and kings (the Pandavas), being worsted by that foremost hero (Arjuna) in battle, began to tremble like large forests shaken down by a hurricane.
Protected by his army, the high-souled Bharata along with his ministers and counselors like unto a Siddha (hero) went out of Guhaka's abode as if going into heaven.
Having vanquished Marutta, the lord of Rakshasas-Dashaanan-went to other cities belonging to kings desirous (of fighting with him).
Then king Vasuman, endued with knowledge and self-control and of pure conduct, in company with many other kings approached the ascetic Vamadeva.
O great king, when the battle was raging at Raivataka and Pundarika (Arjuna) had gone away from there, Yuyudhana came up.
When that best of ascetics had departed, the lord of wealth and king also came there. That one conversant with Liberation touched Go-koti's head as well as gold and jewels; then he gave away a single jewel to each Brahmana present in the assembly.
O best of men, we have no other friend but ourselves. The Panchalas are our enemies and the Andhakas and Vrishnis."
His eyes resembling lotus leaves, having a dark blue circle around them and large as the quarter of an elephant's hide were looking like a beautiful lotus with its stalk cut off by means of fish-hooks.
Hearing these words that were not agreeable in the assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana said thus to Vasudeva who was possessed of great strength and renown.
"O son of Pritha, the brave Karna was going on with his arms and armour when he was stopped by Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira). He said that it is not proper for us to kill men whose relatives have been killed."
See here assembled together by thousands the vultures and jackals, all of fierce aspect, standing before me with their faces towards one another.
Surely those that are not able to save themselves by their own prowess, and who also resemble chips of wood in size, shall be destroyed like the froth on an ocean.
That man who goes to bed with a woman, after having taken her promise of obedience and submission like one going to sleep under the shade of tree that has been cut down.
He then carried away the fearful and terrified heroes, as Vaikarni carries off the spirits to the kingdom of Yama.
Then, O king, the energy of that lord of all creatures entered into Vritra in a dreadful form and began to burn him.
Coming up with a powerful bow, the invincible son of Madri-the king of all warriors-Sahadeva.
Rāma, having thus honoured the bird and dismissed it in that way, went away from there for his desired destination on Puspaka.
The clouds, emitting the sounds of Dindubhas (kettledrums) at every moment were roaring. Every day a new sound was heard from them as if they had taken some vow or other and could not be satisfied with it.
Your troops could not even look at Bharadvaja, when the latter stood in their midst like a thousand-rayed Sun.
Accompanied by all his Mlechchas and those living on the sea-coast, king Brihadbala of mountainous region.
The Kshatriya who is engaged in this, sees Brahma entering into him. This I tell you fully as an expert of the Vedas.
O chastiser of foes, it was ordained that on the completion of three years after my birth this prince would be born in your house. O king of kings, he is a child who will destroy all sorrow and grief for you; listen to what I say, O Puruva chief. Formerly an invisible voice spoke thus to me from the sky-“O son of Suta (Pandava), go now to Kurukshetra with Krishna."
O descendant of Bharata, those kings desirous of securing the destruction of your followers and kingdom as well as that of yourself, approached Yudhishthira seated on his throne with skins spread over it. Those rulers then asked for a share in their own dominions; and they said “We desire also the termination of this war.”
The Vaishyas should supply food to the Brahmanas and Kshatriya. They who always celebrate sacrifices with a sacred fire, they who live in secluded places, and those that observe fasts for four months every year.
The king of the Kekayas, after paying due honours to Bharata gave him excellent elephants and beautiful blankets and cloths.
The fire, which is the agent of a sacrifice and has its fuel in two sides (viz., the sacrificer's knowledge on one side and his faith on the other), begins to burn when it finds any fault with those that are considered as its fuel. Then mantras having been recited for pacifying them they begin to blaze forth.
Ask this ruler of earth, all the fourfold sciences and their respective mantras; as also those connected with each of the four modes (of life).
With his face flooded with tears, and bowed down in humility he said:-"O king! O you of great wisdom. See this person who has told me your words."
The Brahmanas, who are present there, eat such excellent and well cooked food as sweetmeats (made of) rice boiled in milk or sugar-cane juice; fruits which grow on trees called Shashkauli and Karavira, the fruit of Palasa tree (Pterocarpus Marsupium), Mula-fruit, Puri-kapua made from wheat flour with a little salt added to it, Ksharaka-rice prepared by pounding first and then boiling in water flavoured with cardamoms, Maireya pudding, Ragi cakes, breads made out of barley or corn starch, fried rice mixed up with honey, various other sorts of meat, good dishes cooked without fat, clarified butter, curds, fresh milk, cold drinks, wholesome fruits and roots, all these articles they take.
O my son, the grief that has come over me is as heavy and acute as love. This fire of sorrow will soon burn up everything in me.
Like a huge meteor, burning with great splendour in the sky, that chastiser of enemies viz., Vasuki, is here for your sake.
By his roaring like that of a lion, by the sound of his name (Rāvana), and fearful cries, he struck terror into all those monkeys.
Having thus collected his mind, the intelligent prince endued with a tranquil soul and having controlled all his senses, desirous of subjugating those enemies who were incapable of being vanquished by any means whatever.
Some of the charioteers cried aloud “Let there be made ready for fight, chariots and lances.” Others said "Get down from your horses." And others again exclaimed “Yoke on the horses at once," while some began to yoke their steeds adorned with golden trappings.
Then as if playing with his own soldiers, the battle-cry of Raudra (Karna) resounded in that fight; and like a huge cloud at the end of Yuga dispelling all animals.
That one, with whom you will pass the last moments of your life; that one who is coming before you as a king among ghosts and terrible spirits. With devotion do you follow her, O foremost of those gifted with intelligence."
He then spoke these words to that foremost of men, Bhishma. They were the result of his own high soul and not inspired by any one else.
Then, O mighty monarch, Satyaki, his bow cut off and deprived of all sense by anger, shot a highly powerful dart at the latter's breast.
Then as the night passed away, those best of Brahmanas heard that voice which had been uttered by that high-souled one. At dawn all the Rishis addressed Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), saying
Today, my shafts furnished with golden ornaments will pierce your body and draw out the blood that is concealed by the weapon.
Learning of the sinful intentions of Draupadi towards Pandavas, Satyavana (Draupada) had already foreseen this.
O Rama, I have thus related everything that has taken place between myself and Bharata. He is now plunged in grief or he may be rejoiced; but a friend's departure can never be forgotten by him who has friendship for his refuge at all times.
Yudhishthira said : I bow before you. Do not reject my request who am in great distress and whose end is nigh.
The three worlds were conquered by Vishnu, who performed feats of his prowess. Hearing the words of Lakshmana that had great sense and meaning he was highly angry; but taking up a terrible arrow. Then there appeared innumerable celestials, Daityas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Charanas, Maharsis and Guhyakas (the spirits).
Yudhishthira, wearing matted locks and a deer-skin as his dress, lived in the forest for many long years. He was unknown even to men.
Through the strife between Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, I shall gain honour; as also through my sons. O Purandara (Indra), let there be eternal fame for me in this way.
The Rishis, having assembled in Prabhasta (in the west), were engaged in consultation; and they said "Let us wander over all the earth. I am a holy pilgrim let not your desire be disappointed."
By living on leaves and stones, by eating with his own teeth the roots of trees, and grasses, I have conquered this hell.
O Janamejaya, the son of Sharadvata was a pupil in arms. He was also a favourite disciple of Govinda (Krishna).
Then many of your followers, the rulers of countries and cities with their troops approached Arjuna that foremost of car-warriors.
You are a king of kings, you know the science of policy and war. Having conquered this earth by your valour and piety, you have distributed it among her rulers; therefore there is no reason for you now to repent O son of Pritha.
The ground was covered with blood. It appeared like a shower of rain in the sky, and tears were seen falling from the eyes of all beasts that cried (in pain).
O Keshava, you are the beginning and end of all creatures. You are Krishna (the destroyer) when you have taken birth in this world; you are Yajna (sacrifice); and eternal penances originate from you.
I can bear all these misfortunes for the sake of Rāma. But this (Ravana's) prowess is unbearable by me, and therefore shall be slay him in battle.
Thus did the sacrifices of that intelligent king, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, spread all around like mountains.
Then as the wind destroys clouds, he began to kill those warriors with their chariots resembling aerial cars and having standards furnished with arms.
When he saw that the Rishi, who had never fought with any one and was proceeding towards his hermitage without being armed for war, slain by foes, how could Satyaki have forgotten this?
And the Rishis and celestials also glorified him. Beholding that illustrious and effulgent deity, the bearer of sacrificial offerings (Agni), his energy became extinguished on account of being overshadowed by Vishnu's energy. Seeing the God who is the giver of boons and the Lord of all celestial beings;
Vaishampayana said : Having spoken thus, Kanka (Dhritarashtra) went away with his whole household. The son of Dhritrasthra (Kaurava), too became affected with grief on this occasion.
Thus the Brahmanas, learned in all branches of knowledge and well versed in religious rites, and endued with good behaviour, came there.
Having adored the lord of waters, those illustrious deities went back to their respective abodes. The highly effulgent Varuna also was installed on his throne by them.
O king, I will perform the sacrifice for your son. By that you shall be able to kill a thousand and ten thousand men with ease (in battle).
I wish, O lord of the celestials, that you may have for your vehicle those horses which were the vehicles of Indra; and elephants as also chariots.
One who possesses wealth enjoys all the objects of sense, viz., sound and touch and form and smell and taste; but a man without riches can enjoy none.
The soul of that Asura who was killed by Krishna in his former birth has taken the form of Karna. Remembering this old feud, O hero, he will fight with Arjuna and Kesava (Krishna).
While thus conversing with one another, the two brothers found themselves on a field of flowers strewn over the surface of earth.
Those high-souled kings, purified by the acts of their birth and asceticism have saved all creatures.
I shall not eat meat of any kind; this is hot and does not please me. But, O child, I will kill a mouse (for my food); do you permit it."
Having said this, they went away with the fierce-eyed son of Bhrigu. The Rishis then addressed Bhargava in sweet words saying "O Rama!"
Then raising the bow up, that mighty-armed hero placed it on his shoulder. Thereat all creatures of water were struck with wonder.
The beautiful lady, thus caught by the serpent fell on the ground with her senses lost. She became pale and deprived of all her ornaments and beauty.
Having heard this, the son of Sarvata went at once and said to Valmiki-"I have been able to get hold of that bird which you had told me.
During the dreadful and terrible battle that was thus going on, a river of blood with red waves began to flow.
Though I am bound by the fetters of righteousness, yet through my own power and because Arjuna is in our hands,
Dhaumya said I shall now describe to you the sacred and pious objects in that direction called Anarta, which lies towards the West.
Sanatsujata said: There is nothing in this world or sky that looks like it, except the Sun. It does not exist on Earth and yet it pervades everything including water even within the depths of the ocean.
While those best of men and firm bowmen were looking on, he went with the speed of a bird towards Bhagirathi.
Having heard this history, O king, all men shall be freed from grief and fear as also their sins.
Thereupon, having saluted those high-souled words of the lord of beasts, Gomāyū said a few more words.
Let us tonight pass happily the one night here. O best of men, in the morning you ought to see Janaka.
Having given away one hundred thousand kine, together with their calves, king Bhagiratha obtained the highly desirable regions of bliss.
Hearing the words of Vinata's son, Galava said that a fourth part (of his share) was left for him and added "it is necessary."
And O Raghava, I have been thus honoured by my friends and relatives. But the friend of that descendant (of Raghu) whom we found out through fire is now dead."
Cutting off his bow with many arrows, Partha turned away from the field. Then Ambastha also taking up a mace in anger and
The region which is acquired by giving away a cow, one does not acquire when he gives her away. It has been seen that men who give away kine for food and drink become destitute of the milk they have drunk, deprived of their senses and covered with filth from urine and dung.
Having thus struck the son of Radha with nine arrows, Sahadeva again pierced him with ten shafts having their points cut into knots.
Those, who are gifted with little energy and strength of soul and power, are harassed wherever they go. I do not live in such houses as those that have their inmates engaged in the pursuit of pleasure through riches or wealth;
When the son, enveloped by his father's embrace and held fast with a chain of affection, touches his limbs what can be more than that?
Then seeing the two princesses and the king asleep, they thought that he was still in his inner apartment.
Thereupon Pritha, (Kunti), heard the recitation of Vedas by her son whose heart was free from all kind of malice and who had truthfulness for his character.
I have attained great misery by having you for a wife. The son of Pandu, Shvamaka and handsome Gudakesha is youthful
I apprehend, O Lakşmaņa that Vaidehi shall be either cut into pieces or dismembered by the Raksasa assuming shapes at will.
O best of the Bharata race, (Arjuna) cut off his head like a mountain with three summits. Blood began to flow in torrents from that severed trunk.
By performing the Shravani (fast) for twelve days, in a Shraavana month one gets wealth and riches. He lives on celestial food while he is engaged in the performance of five sacrifices every day.
If a weak enemy is burnt by his powerful antagonist, then he deserves it. O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), one should strike at the foe when struck in return.
Markandeya said : Thus questioned by the highly intelligent man, with great satisfaction of mind and seeing that he was desirous of doing good service (to her), Sarasvati thus spoke.
When he had gone out, the king did not even once sigh with sorrowful heart. He then went by a great road outside (the city).
Having your brothers Rama and Lakshmana, who are both desirous of serving you, with due respect; taking them in your arms do you adore these two foremost ones.
I shall renounce the three worlds and even my kingdom in heaven if there is anything superior to these two.
Thereupon the exceedingly energetic Hanumān, son of Pavana again said these soothing words in order to comfort Sītā.
What could be a greater misery for me than this, viz., that I am now seeing those foremost of men lying asleep on the ground?
This Deity of universal form is incapable, even by Brahma himself, and I too cannot see. You are a king among men; those other desires which reside in your heart shall be gratified also (by me).
Then Arjuna came near that pious and greatly virtuous person. Introducing himself as Arjuna, he then said these words.
A very cruel, a deed disapproved of by all men; the object is not at once achieved and it brings infamy.
That cow, which is given away with the Kapila (a species of deer) and a pair of golden water-pots filled with wealth and various kinds of apparel, acquires those merits that are acquired by the giver.
Do you make gifts of jewels and gems to the Brahmanas as also to all persons who sing. Like the celestials, do you bestow your wealth upon every body according to their desire! Passing some time in this way and enjoying great happiness, this city will again become a happy one.
O you of great strength, this fear has arisen. Do you save me from it; and for that reason I am telling you all these things.
Thus, the lord of earth viz., Divodasa, enjoying himself with his wives in the woods, begot upon Madhvi a son named Pratardana.
The Physician said : O Brahmana, do not blame me for this act of mine which is very proper and which has been done in the way my forefathers have acted.
That man who, in battle, slays a warrior on the car with his own chariot or one slain by an elephant (with its), is like Purandara himself.
Having presented the celestial umbrella of excellent hundred spire and made of gold, he waited there for a Brahmana.
The illustrious Mahadeva then said these words in a sweet and grave voice. I am pleased, O foremost of men! O destroyer of foes, you have practised penances.'
Having reached a beautiful place for their amusement, they saw there many excellent trees and mansions like those of the lord of heaven; and various kinds of food and drink which were very delicious. The two Vrishni heroes then entered quickly into an inner apartment filled with jewels of great beauty and value. They began at leisure to eat all sorts of good things, O Bharata!
The sounds of the conchs, the twang of bows and arrows, the clatter of chariots; the shouts of heroes, the rattle of cars; the neighing of horses, the cries of birds and animals as well as their loud roars in the forest all mingled together and resembled a concert.
Consulting and considering with his ministers, the Rākşasa prince arranged for Lankă's defence.
Then all the sons of Dhritarashtra, with the Brahmanas and accompanied by many charioteers went on slowly in battle array.
In that foremost of men, who has ascended heaven by his own deeds, O son of Pritha! the earth will appear like a night without moon.
The slayer of Bala also, knowing that Shuka was performing a most virtuous act, asked him the cause for his delight.
Men, snakes, Gandharvas and Yakshas came there to see that great personage for his wonderful feats.
O you of long arms, the dreadful Asramasravas resembling a mountain stream and abounding in shells (of crabs), was seen by Rama as it is on account of its being made with blood.
The self-create Brahma himself created these cows, who are the mothers of all creatures. They have been endowed with such power that they can save even men, and gods born in a lower order than theirs.
Vaishampayana said : Hearing these harsh and rough words, that foremost of the strong men-the powerful Bhimasena was greatly enraged.
Seeing his form, the Kshatriyas desirous of doing good to their enemies thought it was a Rakshasa and closed their eyes.
Having been defeated, Bhimasena then drove the large army of Dhritarashtra away from that spot as Indra had formerly driven off all the Danavas.
Having seen that the best of all things, viz., sesame seed was used in making various ornaments by her he named it Tilottama.
Those foremost of car-warriors, those scorcher's of foes and all the Panchala warriors having their cars stationed in proper order began to surround that hero belonging to the Shini race. Then like Marutas surrounding Sakra when he wished to check Indra they surrounded him who was capable of checking his enemies (in battle).
The mighty and highly powerful son of Vrikodara was born yesterday. He is a Rakshasa endowed with the power of illusion, he has terrified me greatly; that one desirous of victory for us all be an obstacle in my sons' course (of action). Who prevented Ghatotkacha from advancing against Drona?
Then Sikhandin, thinking in his mind that Bharata's grandfather was a woman, did not strike him at all.
Vaishampayana said : Listen, O king as I describe in detail the destruction of that house built by Jata and the liberation of the Pandavas.
Dhritarashtra said : I have heard that what is difficult of being known by reason becomes easy when the understanding goes in search of it.
Vaishampayana said : The king, while wandering in the great forest called Mahāraņyaka, which was inhabited by lions and tigers saw a deer.
Bhishma said A Kshatriya who is incapable of following the duties laid down for him, should follow those of a Vaishya by adopting agriculture and cow protection when he becomes reduced in circumstances.
O mighty-armed one, we have seen the disappearance of your hair; and the separation from Rāma possessed by great renown.
By your brother, the lord of wealth and by his army. O mighty hero! you have accomplished a great act for which we are all proud."
That intelligent lord of the celestials, having received that boon from Maghavat (Indra), kept it in his mind and discharged Kharas.
Thereupon, the king with great rapidity discharged at Suta's son an arrow resembling Yama's rod and drawn up to its fullest extent.
It is not proper that we should kill the enemy with celestial weapons. We shall vanquish them by our own simplicity and bravery in battle.
When sorrow, pain and misery are the result of some particular cause, even that one should be renounced.
Drupada pierced Bhishma with twenty-five arrows, Virata struck him with ten and Shikhandin with twenty-five.
Those two heroes, those mighty car-warriors resembling the sun at the end of a Yuga (in splendour), scorched each other with sharp arrows.
And hurled at Rāma, the invincible; and all those shafts discharged by them were (in a moment) rendered ineffectual.
All of you were rendered senseless and deprived of your senses by Hanumān. And if he go out, the life in me will be gone also.
O you who are blessed, what shall I do for you? What act of mine is now proper that will be beneficial to you both? Do tell me; and let my action be agreeable.
This Gandiva, of great strength and made of the wood called Sharadvata is Arjuna's chief weapon.
Having thus roved that army of the Rākşasas, resembling a forest full of lions and abounding in elephants and steeds; and having slain those troops with his arrows, the lord (Rama) proceeded on.
O king, he saw a beautiful country rich with golden pebbles and equal in happiness as the gold itself.
O descendant of Kuru, the sons of Draupadi and Arjuna (viz., Ashvatthama), Charudeshna, Samba, that great car-warrior Pradyumna; all these ten warriors adorned with excellent ornaments and banners were stationed in front of Shalva's chariot.
Therefore, O twice-born one there is no other father for us except the god. Our own soul should be known as our real parent; therefore worship it with respect and honour."
Thus struck by Bhimasena, the charioteer's son and leader of Kuru forces sat down on his car deprived of sense.
We saw on the mountain many charming caves and places. There were there hundreds of cars resounding with songs, as also the grounds where celestial sports took place; and those belonging to Kubera, some open and others enclosed by hills.
Then that one resembling the summit of Kailasa, wearing blue robes and looking like a cloud charged with rain, thus spoke in grief.
Then the son of Virata, riding on a horse that was as fleet as wind and which was decked with gold fought down all those carwarriors. Thereupon he dragged away Pandya from the midst of his brothers.
The fifteenth year of one's life, if passed in learning the Vedas by moonlight and under proper guidance is said to yield great fruit.
Thereupon, O monarch, Bhimasena of mighty prowess waxing worth with rage covered the foremost division of cars with a downpour of shafts.
The other creatures were created for destruction. All of them are not everlasting and the Kshatriyas have been granted special privileges in this respect, hence it is said that their duty forms a superior virtue.
Bhishma said You have already heard me describe the duties of a householder, as ordained by those wise men who are conversant with duties and acts. Now listen attentively to what I shall say next on this subject, O Yudhishthira.
The great fame of king Ambira, having heard the faults and accusations made against him by good men speedily took possession of his kingdom.
Dhritarashtra said Tell me truly what is the nature of this Bharata year and in which it has lost its vigour. In which also my son Duryodhana has become covetous beyond measure; where the Pandavas have become avaricious, and why I am inclined towards them? You are wise and you know everything as truth.
The king should be watchful and self controlled. He must know the weak points of his own enemies; he can never find out their strong ones, but by watching for those weak places in them which may give him an opportunity of striking at them.
The high-souled monkeys along with Sugriva, desirous of receiving the Brahmanas set about their preparations.
If we are destroyed, what will become of your sons? On our being slain by you the race from which you have sprung shall be extinct.
You sport with six faces, as a cock at pleasure in various forms. Somas are your initiatory rites and Maruts are those of you who never cease from action; Dharma is yourself (in the form) of Indra having Vayu for his support.
The Dravidas, the kings of Sinhalā and Kasmira; as well as that highly effulgent monarch, the king of Kuntibhoja, possessing a very noble steed.
A husband, having cohabited with his wife and begotten children on her, has no right over them. The ancient sages have declared that the fatherhood is not of him who begets but he from whom springs life.
Hearing these words of the Rishi, that foremost of men said to me,-O Suta! do not speak in this manner before people.
This revolving wheel of Time, which is called Kalachakra and whose twelve spokes represent the twelve months; whose six spokes stand for the six seasons; which is ageless and eternal; who moves on without stopping; whose discus is marked with twelve spots representing the twelve years; in short that which includes this entire universe within itself.
Considering myself as an old man and being confident in my ability I have spoken thus; but that grief of mine which is always present in my mind, takes away all cheerfulness from me.
Meeting Vasishtha, Bharata was welcomed by him. But that highly effulgent one did not know his son Dasharatha's offspring.
Then Dhananjaya, in order to check the advance of his enemy, shot arrows at horses furnished with housings and yokes that were well-decorated; and also he struck chariots of Gandharva form which had been decked out by clever workmen. Those heroes who could not bear war were all killed there on.
Contentment, self-control and patience; truthfulness in speech, purity of person and simplicity of conduct. Sacrifice, firmness of purpose, righteousness-all these have been laid down as the eternal duties (of men).
Do not tell them that I am their enemy and do not go for fighting with me. O hero, you should speak thus only when it is necessary; but this shall never be done by persons like myself.
Or, if they have gone there as you say that is the place where I saw them. What conversation took place between those two and what did they do in it?
Sanjaya said When the highly powerful Bhimasena roared in that way, Karna rushed against him with a terrible shout.
Then that foremost of all wielders of weapons, Atikaya endued with great energy, cut down the trees and rocks by means of his shafts decked in gold.
There are many good men in this world who follow virtue and righteousness. They, however, have been destroyed along with their wives and children for the wrongs they had committed against others!
I shall not be at ease, nor shall my heart be pleased with her, in those delightful groves and gardens.
The learned men say that one who is pure becomes purified by giving away and receiving gifts. One should, therefore, always be purc in conduct.
You are the eye of Pushkara, you have a countenance like that of an elephant; and you have a thousand faces. And you possess thousands of arms. You are one among the guardians of all creatures, O you who take your birth from water! You are Bhavana (the creator), and foremost among celestials and Asuras.
Having abandoned the sacrificial rites, you have been always living in the forest and enjoying various kinds of gems and jewels.
Why has my brother, taking refuge in me for his own safety, uttered a strange and unnatural speech? O Laksmana save me.
There the king with folded hands, saw there an aged ascetic who was also advanced in years. He asked him for troops (to fight).
Thereupon those two, both of whom were dear friends of him (Dhritarashtra), told the king that thousands upon thousands of Panchalas and Srinjayas had been killed in battle.
If a Brahmana is performing sacrifices, the Pitris follow him. The god of Fire also follows that person who performs his daily religious rites and duties; but one should abstain from intercourse with women on such occasions.
Then Karna extinguished that fire by means of the Varuna weapon and then made all directions dark as clouds.
One, who is content with his own knowledge and free from fear or anxiety for anything in the world, cannot have any apprehension of death.
At the time of dissolution, they will go to those countries where rice and barley are produced.
When Rāma was thus speaking, Vibhīşana said to him who had become overwhelmed with grief and whose words were fraught with sense and were uttered for the attainment of his object.
He is the king of mountains, he has a body resembling that of Death himself. Even if Indra were to fight with him in his state when he assumes form for fighting, he would be like one killed by Kala (Death).
The Nishada said, O you that are so cruel! You have made the ascetics destitute of wealth. Alas, poverty is a great evil in this world.
Thus wounded, and afflicted with pain he sat down on the terrace of his car. He had lost consciousness from the shock produced by that weapon which was now glowing in its own native splendour.
Those kings, who had come by the royal road and reached Avanti (Ujjain) began to praise him. When that time came for Krishna's going home after his victory in battle,
Cities without Brahmanas, with their gates and walls of various kinds are not beautiful.
Do you see that I am gratified with your conduct. And as long, O child, the desire of men for food is not satisfied, so will be their wish fulfilled in respect to you; and as long as pious acts abound on earth shall your fame last among mankind.
And the troops, like a hurricane sweeping over all directions and causing great commotion in them. The mighty armed hero, ever ready to afford protection to his friends,
Beholding them slain, Rāma grew wroth and took up a goodly bow.
Thereupon that mighty car-warrior, the king of Kuru, waxing wroth and delightfully smiling shot his arrows piercing into the vitals.
Or what I have seen with my own eyes, is now manifest. The mountain has been rent asunder through the power of Rāma, lord of rivers.
A man, who is shorn of attachment and whose soul has been conquered by the practice of Yoga, attains that highest success which depends on Renunciation.
The Lord said Absence of fear, purity in character and concentration in meditation, charity, self-control, sacrifice, study of the Vedas, penances, sincerity.
Those who are men of wisdom, when they give away food on the way in which mendicants beg for alms and live by it, tell them that he is a giver. The very poor with limbs contracted with emaciation and covered over with dust, seek out persons who distribute food; one should therefore always speak about the merits (of such charity). One who speaks thus becomes himself as good an Annaprastha as those who really make gifts.
I bow down to the Sun for his welfare. He is frequented by and adored of all, including celestials and Pitris and Yakshas; he dwells in the company of Asuras and Nishacharas and Siddhas (A class of immortals). And like gold or fire, he looks resplendent with effulgence on account of his rays.
The killer and the one killed, both of them know not who kills or is himself killed.
The anger of the sons of Pritha (the Pandavas) was appeased by Draupadi and that of Dhritarashtra's son were quelled by Krishna.
It is better, O king, that a person should follow his own religion with its defects than another's which has been practised by him out of obedience. He who does not perform the duties ordained for himself and follows those laid down in other religions never commits any sin from wantonness (of action).
My two arms, which are smeared with sandal paste and also my other arm (i.e. the one with which I have killed Duryodhana), will attain to that great end for whose attainment this son of Dhritarashtra together with his sons and friends has been sent away in defeat by these very same hands!
Thereupon the highly effulgent son of Pandu, said these words in reply which were quite seasonable. “O Karna, O mighty-armed hero, this is enough for you.”
And from Karna also, discharged shafts with wings of feathers. These hundreds and thousands covered the hero (Partha).
Piercing the Satvata with many shafts, O king and then smiling a little he cut off his bow with an excellent Bhalla.
O invincible one, show me your prowess in this body of yours. I will then eat you up as a reward for the sight that you shall afford me."
Hearing these and other words of Vrikodara, O king, Shalya became filled with grief.
Taking up a mace, Shrutakarman struck him with it. Then he rushed at the son of Drona and cut his bow in two pieces when the latter was drawing an arrow on the left hand side.
O foremost of men, the battle-field then resembled a river with its current red from blood and with its sides full of leeches; it was crowded with fish-elephants-oxen and other animals; it had herds of broken-necked elephants swimming in its deep waters. It looked like one covered over head by clouds at the end of summer season, being strewn all around with shafts arrows and clubs which were on the field as numerous as fishes in water. The standard of that army bore peacock feathers and its soldiers wore garlands of flowers round their necks. They also adorned themselves with golden ornaments. And the ground became variegated with lotuses grown up amidst muddy soil. In fact the entire arena appeared charmingly beautiful.
Then having arrived at the gate and inquired after his health, he asked him as a friend might ask another regarding what was proper for doing.
Then the fathers said unto their sons, 'That son who is born in a noble family and is capable of performing all excellent duties should never be abandoned.
Then, O god, summoning Kashyapa he said these words:-O sinless one, your offspring have been born as Dandashukas (serpents). They are all venomous and very pleasant in the taste. O scorcher of foes they were cursed by their mothers with a view that you may not give them shelter under any circumstances whatever.
And that best of men, having arrayed in battle all the various weapons and arms for use, with cars, elephants and horses and foot-soldiers furnished with banners, and well-fed troops decked out (with ornaments) and bearing marks of valour, placing his flags at proper distances from each other; then as quickly as a bird of prey does fly away.
Hearing these words of his, the king's eyes were filled with tears. He then gave away a large wealth in honour of his favourite son.
O king, I then proceeded towards the palaces of Mahendra (Indra), Kubera and Yama as well Varuna.
So also other mighty bowmen, desirous of slaying Dhananjaya and his followers began showering their arrows.
You are neither the Creator, nor the Lord of this world. O powerful one! you have created all these moving and unmoving things in this universe.
O descendant of Bharata, the soldiers in your army being thus struck with panic, began to tremble like huge masses of water agitated by a tempest.
Hearing that the Pandavas had been defeated at dice, Madhusudana (Krishna) speedily arrived in Kamyaka and thus addressed those sons of Pritha.
Then that prince with matted locks addressed Rāma, saying, “I am poor and have many sons. O highly powerful prince! I live in a forest ever frequented by the vicious people; do you always take me for your care.”
The refuge of man in the next world is his character. In this world, pure conduct increases one's life.
As he was going with great speed, the son of Pandu Bhimasena appeared like a crescent moon.
Thinking on the nature of virtue, he said that I should go with faith and confidence.
O son, Vaideha is coming here. He will surely do what I shall command him."
These golden shafts, furnished with wings of the colour of Kanka's feathers and resembling in their splendour the thunder-bolts of Mahendra himself, have been produced by Kartikeya from his bow-string. They are as sharp as snakes when enraged; they possess straightness and acute points like those of arrows made for battle,
O son of Kunti, the mutual love and attachment between them was never seen by others.
Suparna then said, “Come hither; come here.” The grandson of Shini got upon the chariot yoked with horses resembling flames and having the hue of the sun. That car was furnished in every way by its owner Daruka according to Keshava's wishes.
The sinful deeds of a wise man are destroyed by his mind. He is happy in the sky (heaven).
Thereupon those two foremost of car-warriors and the best bowmen in all worlds, attacked with their arrows, Partha's sons headed by Saineya.
Do the Kurus, together with Dhritarashtra and his sons speak highly of him in their kingdom? All of them do not they remember Arjuna as leader in all battles when they see these thieves assembled here.
Having received the permission of king Virata, he led all these warriors into that city. He also took in Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki; then Chedi prince Dhristaketu and great car-warrior Drupada; Sikhandin, Yama's son Uttamauja, Chekitana with his Kaikeya brother, Kaurava prince Yuyutsu, Utatamanja of Panchala race having excellent steeds and Subahu together with sons of Draupadi (all) altogether.
That foremost of Rākṣasas, worked up with rage and resembling a hill in majesty, began to destroy all the monkeys.
In general, such circumstances as these produce the king's death and a dreadful calamity.
This boat is made of the bark of trees, it is so light that it can move on water. It will take you all over this country from me."
Then as if smiling, Karna shot a celestial weapon. And then with that arrow the king of mountains was split into two parts.
Knowing that this world is a play of Bhava, you have, with the help of vows for attaining your own object, controlled yourself like an intelligent god.
It is proper that a teacher should give instructions to his disciple, who without knowing what was right and wrong had gone astray from the path of virtue.
The Disease said : O best of Brahmanas, sacrifices and gifts and asceticism and the Vedas as well as truth are always pure.
That man, who forsaking virtue goes after wealth and profit for his own sake only, is degraded from this world as well as the next.
You shall not break, O lady, the command of Nahusha. This wicked-minded one will be soon punished for his offence.
And all the light that had been diffused by those lamps was put out. In that battle which went on during the night without any intermission,
That grief which has overpowered me on account of my having banished those who had worn skins made of deer-skins, I shall bear. Do not kill the Kurus.
Learning that her enemy, Yudhishthira was now in possession of his kingdom and knowing also the cause of her grief for which she had been deprived by Karna's death.
Overcome by grief for Sītā, his eyes filled with tears and he fell down on the earth exclaiming “O beloved."
Beholding the wielders of celestial weapons, a loud shout arose. The inhabitants of heaven and those that had wings in their bodies did not stir from their places.
The Pandavas will not leave them who have sought their protection. They are therefore the refuge of me also, in my present condition; but they do not accept it (of me).
This was the wealth that existed in Yudhishthira's treasury when he lost at dice. It consisted of sixteen, twenty-four and thirty thousand millions (of coins).
O lord of creatures, this verse was originally sung by the illustrious Vivasvata himself. It describes that which is eternal and indestructible in all men.
The Pandavas will pursue and kill those of you who have left the field, though they are stained with sin. They do not seek your destruction in battle but for their own welfare."
Then the king of Pragjyotisha, resisted by that shower (of arrows), began to kill with his own shafts both Krishna and Partha.
Drona, Karna and the powerful Shalya were slain in battle. The author of all these hostilities Shakuni too was killed by Arjuna.
The act of the bull will surely bring about great happiness. And it is for your gratification that those men who are giving away kine shall receive inexhaustible wealth from you in return."
Thereupon, with a cheerful countenance Sugriva addressed the eldest of Rama's brothers, saying,-I will now tell you why there was enmity between me and Vali.
There is no fear for such a man in his daily life, nor has he any sons. He does not meet with misfortune of any kind; and therefore lives long. And everywhere (in every affair) victory awaits him.
O child, a Brahmana named Haripingle came in his house clad only in rags and carrying an ashtavakra (stick) made of Bilva.
As the seeds, burnt by fire, do not revive and grow again; similarly one's self does never revives from griefs which are like fire.
That Brahmana, who does not allow the sacred fire of his domestic ritual to go out and whose sacrificial rites are ever being performed by him, obtains all that is good in life.
The duties of persons living in retreats are incapable of being seen and they have many openings. They attain, however, to a vision of the eternal by means of scriptural texts.
As a small quantity of ghee puts out the fire that blazes without fuel, so does a little food put down this great disease.
The remnant of the food which he had given Yudhishthira, that son of Prishata ate. And when Draupadi was served with her share, the rest (of his meal) became lost. Having obtained all those enjoyments from Surya and become equal in effulgence to himself by means of them, O king, that lord bestowed on Brahmanas whatever wishes they entertained in their minds; at the proper times such sacrifices as were necessary for celebrating the four kinds of sacrifice viz., Vajapeya, Raja-suya, Ashvamedha and Putra-masa are celebrated according to Vidhi and Mantras.
O monarch, as his anger increased from every source of energy that he possessed, great and wonderful things began to happen.
From the nose of Surabhi came out a cow, named by that name. She was white in colour and red like gold; she had many kine for protecting living creatures.
Then Karna advanced against him like a mighty elephant attacking another of his kind.
Let them be at ease, let them sport with a mind free from anxiety; and let them drink Varuna's wine. I shall slay Sugriva along with Laksmana by myself, Angada and Hanuman, as also all the monkeys here assembled together.”
The Brahmanas are always worthy of being protected even when they commit faults. Therefore, I shall again fight with them and be filled with joy. After seeing all those kings that had come here for fighting in words as also other persons who have not yet come (to the field),
Then, as the great ones were encamped there, it became day for them; and they began to roar like ocean.
Then he fell down from his chariot, struck by Sahadeva. Covered with blood all over the body and thus striking terror into the hearts of the Pandavas in battle.
Seeing you who are well, embracing Lakşmaņa and Laksmana, I am freed from my grief like the Sun himself cleared of clouds.
The elements of the senses are said to be as follows. Water is called Adhibhuta, Soma (the moon) is considered as Adhidevata and Earth occupies the position of Panchama Bhuta or the fifth element; while smell stands for Aatman or spirit.
That arrow, whetted and sharp like the thunder-bolt of Indra, shot by Karna from his arm. pierced through Dhananjaya's arins and entered into him as a snake enters its hole in the earth.
The earth was covered with their heads and the arms of Angada along with them. And it appeared like a mass of gold studded with serpents.
O descendant of Bharata, then the horses and elephants with their riders were cut down by Savyasachin; they also ran in all directions and fell on the ground.
And those, wearing the skins of jackals and crows, having reached Vrikarna (the son of Duryodhana), were all slain by him; as snakes are burnt down when they come in contact with fire.
They who have mastered the science of action, they that are well behaved and virtuous, those that consider with a proper mind the fruits of all actions good or bad, these true men, crowned with virtue and desirous of doing what is for the behoof of everybody, are considered as having acquired heaven.
And after saluting him and inquiring about his welfare, the king said : O sons of Raghu endowed with strength,-I wish you well. I have also sent word before by my messengers that Sugriva has become our friend; and that Rama's mother is all right.
Having yoked with the steeds furnished with various equipments and weapons, that dreadful car resembling a mass of clouds in its deep roar. Then taking his position on it Shini's son rushed against your army; Daruka also proceeded at will towards Keshava (Arjuna). O monarch, then king Duryodhana provided for himself another chariot decked with many golden trappings and having excellent horses endowed with great fleetness and adorned with beautiful coats of mail made up of steel.
O king of kings, he is present in everything and pervades the entire universe. He can be seen by those gods who are freed from all their sins.
That best of Brahma, O king, having accepted that boon in this world, gave it away. And the goddess Uma practised austerities for obtaining Maheshvara as her husband.
Kākutstha, having thus subdued the invincible abode of Varuna with his arrows will bring under subjection Lankä inhabited by Raksasas.
O ruler of men, when the world was in great distress and all religious rites were discontinued on account of a famine, there came amongst them celestial Rishis.
O God, let that which is most excellent in thought and action be mine. Let the celestial come here now as soon as possible with Arjuna who destroys all his enemies; they should appear before me like sacrificial fire.
And, renouncing their affection and retreating far from me with downcast heads these foremost of men will be delighted. They are all polluted in mind; they know not what is right or wrong through the influence of Destiny itself which has ordained this fight. Each speaking ill of another I cannot save you by my skill at arms for your life but only when all those best warriors shall have exhausted themselves on account of vainglory. Then the sons of Pandu also supported by five great heroes, O chief of Kuru's race, will fight against them.
Here you will see Ankolas, Kurantas and Churnakas with Paribhadrakas. And here are the flowering Choots and Patalyas and Kovidaras. Mucukundars also, Arjunas and all these trees growing on mountain-sides, Ketakodalkas, Shirishas Shinsapas, Dhavas, Salmalys Kinkushus, red-coloured Curuvakas; Tinis, Nakatamalas, Chandanas Syandana's Hantalas, Tilaka's Nagabrikshas (Ficus benghalensis), Tinduka Trees having blossoms at their tops and surrounded by many other beautiful trees resembling in beauty that of the river Pampaa. You shall behold those large trees scattered around like so many intoxicated damsels following a handsome youth.
Having then hurled his charioteer down from the car, he killed with arrows of golden wings and furnished with feathered shafts all Janamejaya's horses.
The Kekeyas, the Madrakas and all those who are called Lalitas. Also, Narayanas, Gopalas and Kambojas (of eastern India).
That destroyer of the age of Kali, that ocean like host of Samsaptakas was dried up by Dhananjaya with his keen arrows and sharp shafts.
And you, too shall be the lord of all these rivers. Your abode will always be in Makara's mouth in the ocean.'
You, myself and all others who are worshipping you shall repair there together where we have gone.
That exceedingly powerful Rakshasa, Atikaya, who had been wounded with innumerable shafts and whose armour could not protect him (any longer), was unable to feel any pain. And that foremost of men also did not find it possible to cause any injury to him during the encounter.
Who could withstand the son of Shibi when he came towards Drona, with his face like that of Death and fighting for him?
One man, O Karna, vanquishing all the Kurus in battle and conquering Chitrashena of Gandharva's race had conquered a difficult army. In like manner he defeated the Nivatakavachas, Kalakshyas and Danavas who were invulnerable by gods themselves; thus did you conquer them alone (in war). What other great deeds have been achieved by one person? By capturing each king individually under your control as also Indra himself could not fight with Arjuna.
One should never trust one that is not worthy of confidence, nor should one be too confident in a person who deserves confidence. It has been said that from trusting persons we are often filled with fear and our very roots get cut off (by their acts).
The graceful Krishna, who had gone in person (to the Pandavas), seeing them again and again breathe heavily with anxiety, spoke these words.
That powerful one deprived of energy and strength, cut off those lions armed with nails and teeth that were roaring. He then tied them up in a net.
Arrived there, Indra thus spoke to the royal sage (Rāma), "Enough of your grief! Do what I tell you. Those human beings who have renounced food and given up their bodies in battle or on account of famine will surely attain heaven."
Today I shall go where that grief of Parshata will end. Or Karna may kill me or I him in battle; this is certain which I tell you, O son.
Rāghava, of righteous soul, placing a mighty bow decked with golden ornaments and strings on his shoulder, addressed the Raksasīs.
When the high-souled Pandava was wounded, he gave him a piece of salt. The son of Pritha also became greatly hurt and took refuge behind his standard pole.
Thus addressed, the king (Indra) sent away the swan. Then those swans rose up and flew towards Vidarbha.
The heads of all the limbs follow her, and being attracted by them two eyes are placed at their junction.
The poor man, though desirous of getting riches cannot get them; like elephants with heavy loads on their backs.
Dhrishtadyumna said Vibhatsu, you know the acts of virtuous men in offering sacrifices and teaching others.
O Lord, men behave like the celestials living in this world depending upon their respective acts.
O king, the name of your father was Hamsa and that of his wife Dimbhaka. It has been sung by poets in former times for people's hearing as follows-
Having heard of it for a moment, the immeasurably effulgent celestial sage approached his hermitage with hunger. He saw that in consequence of being afflicted by ignorance, Dina appeared like a star deprived of its rays on account of the conjunction of planets at daybreak and not shining as usual.
In the beginning, only Brahmanas will be found in this world. Then by degrees others also will come into being for its increase.
There is no cause of sorrow, fear or death today. So saying he embraced him with his arms and said
Janamejaya said : You know how the death of my illustrious father took place.
The lord of all creatures, the learned and proud Narada then begot a son on Anjana. Hence it is that this son came into existence without any food; for this reason he was called Sukshma.
The gold-decked mace hurled by the angry Ghatotkacha flew through the air and was met by Karna, who cut it into pieces with his arrows.
O descendant of Bharata, your father asked her every morning and evening whether the Brahmana was well served.
Descending from the car, he performed his ablutions according to due rites. Having caused also a separate sacrifice for purifying himself after leaving the sacrificial ground and having done what was necessary in respect of it, Karna entered into an apartment within the palace.
Those men who, like Brahmanas and mendicants in the time of distress, seek alms from other people with humility, are considered by the king as beggars.
O great king, having been thus addressed by Yudhishthira the best of Gandharvas again asked him a question which was very much difficult.
Saying this, Rāma saluted his mother and then bade adieu to Sītă. And having been thus permitted by them he repaired towards the palace of Dasaratha.
There arose a thick darkness, and there was great quietness; the earth became as impassable with its showers of blood. And it appeared filled up by hundreds of Kinnaras.
Beholding him who is seen by the pious Brahmanas, having purified his soul and mind of all sin; seeing that he had attained piety through asceticism which leads to heaven and liberation from rebirth. Seeing also how Vishnu with mind directed towards Yoga was delighted at being able to see in his three forms (of Manu) the great Creator himself whose form cannot be known even by the stars under the control of Fate. Narayana then worshipped Vasudeva (Krishna).
In the first age, O king a great Asura named Madhu was born of Lohita and he became the eldest son.
Then that exalted one saw there the son of Angiras, and adored Indra by means of Atharvani mantras.
And for this reason, a person of pious soul came here from the ranks of enemies. He told me that he had acted as an impostor (in imitation of you).
And many and various kinds of swords, adorned with gold; also armour and shields pierced through by the arrows.
Listen, O foremost of Brahmanas! Eraka, Kundala, Veni and Venskandha, Kumarka (Krishna), Baluka Shringavesha Dhurta Kaprataratra. These kings belonging to the Kuru race have entered into Agni's mouth
Has the king Yudhishthira been pleased with you? Have Bhima and Arjuna also been satisfied with your conduct towards them.
The acts which are not marked with any special characteristic and those also that have been enjoined in the scriptures should be regarded as of equal importance.
Thereupon smiling, Vibhatsu began to kill the sons of Mala and also Lakshmanasena along with his younger brothers.
The water, the cardinal points, the sky, earth, moon and sun, air, fire as also Pramila, all these are seen by men whose conduct is not right. But that which destroys hatred towards Brahma, which produces nectar itself (i.e., knowledge), cannot be beheld by persons of wicked deeds.
O king, when the Yuga shall be inauspicious (i.e., Kali), Shudras will engage themselves as servants of others.
Having been thus addressed, Janaka replied to the great ascetic saying, "Do you hear me as I explain why this bow has not yet been taken up by any one."
This is the thirty-fourth of Nakula's, that hero, who has his weapons in a golden case and he will be able to bear all burden (of war).
Savitri said : O king, I had before this told you my intention of getting a son. And knowing your desire for one the great grandfather has granted it (to me).
When Devavata was about to take the half of my kingdom, I took that by force for offering it as Dakshina (gift) in sacrifice.
Seeing Agni, the son of Rishi Atri, those celestials went there as they were directed by that deity.
Beholding Dhrishtadyumna of the hue of a peacock, having excellent steeds and having for his standard an umbrella inlaid with gold they fled away from fear.
Adored by the highly blessed Brahmanas versed in Vedanta and worshipped with salutation, praised by citizens.
Passing by three chambers, the subduer of foes, Keshava (Krishna), went towards Vichitravirya's palace. The people were struck with fear when they saw him come there.
Those of my sons who are still alive, should be informed that I have been slain in battle by Bhimasena after being forcibly dragged out (from the field).
He set out, accompanied by the clatter of his car and roaring like a lion. The earth seemed to tremble with the sound of instruments (which he took along).
And all my sorrow that I have in consequence of being deprived of the kingdom and living a wild life, O Vaidehī! Where is she now? And where shall this daughter of Videha be when her relatives are gone and herself not seen by me.
O king, those men who live on earth and also in the sky, having Brahman for their protector acquire that state which is seen by persons of tranquil minds living according to the good path.
Approaching me in battle and seeing me also ready for fight, he said with a staff in his hand O repressor of foes, I am gratified.
Seeing those Rakshasas slain in battle, the sister of Khara (Shurpanakha) fled away; but she soon returned and informed him that all the Raksasis had been killed.
Seeing that hero slain, the mighty car-warrior Ashvathama rushed furiously against Sini's grandson in battle.
Duryodhana himself shot many sharp arrows at Bhimasena when the latter was fighting with his car.
If you think thus, then I cannot have any confidence in you. And if there is no trust on your part also my anxiety will be great.
The Brahmana should be distinguished by his self-control, the Kshatriya for victory and the Vaishyas (merchants) by wealth. A Shudra acquires merit through skill in handicrafts.
When Shakra was thus killed, the goddess Sachi oppressed with grief began to bewail and lament saying-'Alas! Alas!'
Atikaya took up a dreadful bow. He then fixed on the string of his fierce-looking and terrible arrow which looked like an angry snake and was furnished with golden wings.
O best of the Bharata race, he (Dushasana) brought that mighty car-warrior there by his chariot. Having heard these words Duryodhana,
You gods, behold this auspicious mark on his breast. This is the spot from which all beings derive their health and happiness.
Bathing in sacred Tirthas, celebrating the pious rites of purification and hearing discourses on sacred subjects by good men have been lauded as highly meritorious.
The son of Maruta, Maitreya and the descendant of Auhata thus lamenting on account of that calamity, began to eulogise Sarasvati in these words O king! In days gone by it was you who first appeared as a spring from the mouth of Brahma.
Then with arrows of blazing points, shot from the bow and urged on by incantations I pierced him as a mountain is shattered by thunderbolts.
Beholding the army of Shalva's son approach, those sons of Vrishni and Andhaka came out in order to fight.
O king, urged by a messenger I am going to my father. As soon as you remember me (I shall return).
The gods are always desirous of him who does not speak ill of others, and is never angry with those that do not return his love.
When those mighty car-warriors were seated, and adorned with ornaments, that royal city looked as beautiful as the sky studded with bright stars.
O Saumitra, inviting these two foremost of Brahmanas-Agastya and Kaushika-offer them jewels like a field which is watered by the rains.
And as time passed, O king, the ant-hill looked like a sage covered with creepers.
And there are trees with fruit, and creepers twining round the boughs; here dwell many mountains. Here live those Siddhas who wander at their will.
He eats thousands of meals, but he cannot satisfy his hunger with one meal. In the morning he eats a little and returns home without eating any more in the rest of day.
Having asked the lord of men, king Dasaratha that illustrious one went away with those two foremost ascetics at his head.
Sanjaya said When the battle thus began, O king, Subala's son Shakuni went against Sahadeva.
Who is that one, resembling a hill in size, having eyes like lotus petals and holding the bow? He sits on an enormous car yoked with thousand horses. Adorned with sharp lances and swords he appears resplendent as Maheshvara himself surrounded by his weapons (the celestials) or covered all over with lightnings;
Having obtained the permission of that lord of beasts, Gomayu, conversant with the science of policy and greatly enraged on account of what had taken place, desired to kill him.
Having seen his horses and charioteer slain, that chastiser of foes Kripa rushed upon the foremost prince among the Shini's race in order to slay him.
O foremost of kings, this body of yours is like the sword. You are not human but divine in your actions and powers."
Matanga said : O you, ask for some other boon; this is a very difficult one. Why do you torture me? You are taking away my life!
If you did not act as a king, the world would be deprived of its sight and all wise men would cease to perform their duties.
Hearing that the kings had returned, all men of every province were exceedingly glad.
He saw in that palace, large stores of meat and fish kept for cooling the weather.
Yudhishthira said "You are desirous of obtaining my kingdom which is tainted with these sins, viz., insatiable desire for conquests and the exercise of power; pride in one's own prowess; vanity about one's accomplishments and possessions; anger at the sight of any insult offered by enemies or foes; wrathful spirit towards those who have offended you even if they be your friends. Be free from all attachment for meat (and other kinds of food) be emancipated from every kind of sin. Become tranquil and happy."
O king, out of fear of the son of Dhritarashtra, the sons of Pandu were all looking at Krishna.