 Hearing Vishvamitra's words, Raghava with Lakshmana, was filled with great surprise and thus addressed Vishvamitra, saying.
 O Brahmana, you have told us a wonderful and excellent account of the descent of the sacred Ganga, and of her filling up the ocean.
 Like a moment, this night has passed away, O scorcher of foes. The story that I have told you in full.
 That whole night passed away in thought, and in discourse with Sumitrā's son; and the story of Viśvāmitra was narrated.
 Then on the dawn of that day, that subduer of foes, Rāghava, having performed the morning rites, addressed Viśvāmitra, the ascetic, saying.
 The night has passed away. You have heard the highest of the holy Shruti. Cross over the foremost of all sacred rivers, the Trisprtha.
 Hearing that the divine Rishi has come, the boat of the virtuous Rishis has come, the boat of the virtuous Rishis has come to this place of happiness.
 Hearing those words of the high-souled Rāghava, Kaushika, the head of the Rishis, caused the construction of a boat. And arriving at the northern shore, and worshipping the assembly of Rishis, they repaired to the banks of Gangā, and beheld the extensive city of Ayodhyā.
 Then that best of ascetics with Rāma and Laksmana speedily repaired to that extensive and delightful city resembling heaven itself.
 Thereupon Rāma, of exceeding wisdom, addressing the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra, inquired of the excellent city Viśālā.
 O great ascetic, what is the origin of this great race? I am curious to know about it. I wish to hear all about it.
 Hearing Rāma's words, the foremost of ascetics began to relate to him the ancient story of the city of Viśālā.
 Listen, O Rāma, to the story of Śakra, as told by him, and hear how, O Rāghava, the occurrence took place in this place.
 O Rama, in the golden age, there were powerful and virtuous sons of the powerful Diti and Aditi.
 The high-souled men then became filled with doubt. How, they asked, shall we be able to be freed from the influence of the Amara poison, and be cured?
 While they were thus reflecting, a wise man appeared there. He said, "By digging this Kshiroda I shall obtain the nectar.”
 Then he resolved upon making a chasm, he yoked the Vasuki serpent to the car, and then that one of immeasurable energy made the Mandara mountain into a churn.
 Throwing up and vomiting their poisonous serpents and vipers, they all bit the mountains with their teeth.
 Thereupon, O king, the fire-god, called Halahala, appeared. He was fierce in form and terrible in energy. He burnt up the whole universe with the celestials, the Asuras and the human beings.
 Then the gods, seeking the protection of Mahadeva, approached the lord of all creatures, viz., Rudra. They were gratified with him and said, Save us, save us.
 Thus addressed by the celestials, the lord of the gods, the powerful Hara, appeared there in his form with the conch and the discus.
 Then smiling, the monkey, taking up his trident, said to Rudra, O foremost of celestials, you had previously said that this poison should be given to me by the celestials. Therefore, O lord, as you are here, do you accept it.
 Having said these words, the chief of the celestials disappeared there and then. Seeing the deities frightened and hearing the words of the sage Sāngi, Halāhala, dreadful poison, resembling ambrosia, was drunk up. The lord of the deities, having given away the celestials, went away.
 Then all the celestials and Asuras, O descendant of Raghu, began to churn the Ocean. The best of mountains, Manthara, then entered the nether regions.
 Then the celestials with the Gandharvas began to praise the destroyer of Madhu, saying, "You are the refuge of all creatures and particularly of the dwellers of heaven. O mighty-armed one, you should protect us. It behoves you to raise the mountain."
 Hearing these words, Hrishikesha, assuming the form of a tortoise, and placing a mountain on his back, lay down in the ocean.
 That foremost of Beings, that lord of all creatures, Keshava, then, having touched with his hand the summit of that mountain, stood amidst the celestials, and began to churn the Ocean.
 After a thousand years, the Dharmaraja, with a rod in his hand and a Kamandalu in his hand, rose up in the form of a human being, gifted with the eight qualities and with the entire knowledge of the Vedas. The beautiful Apsaras, that had been born in the waters, had been created by Dhanvantari in their first form.
 Six hundred thousand were the number of those beautiful Apsaras. The attendants of theirs, O Kākutstha, were countless.
 Those gods and Danavas do not accept their offerings. And therefore it is that they are called Sadharanas (common).
 O descendant of Raghu, from Varuna's mouth came a daughter of Varuna, that highly fortunate damsel, who was seeking a husband.
 Rama, the sons of Diti did not accept the fair-souled daughter of Varuna. The heroic sons of Aditi accepted her.
 The Asuras were delighted with the capture of Varuna's chariot; the sons of Aditi, the celestials, were also delighted.
 That foremost of steeds, Uccaisravas, rose up with the jewel, Kaustubha, the best of all gems and the excellent nectar.
 And then the destruction of the race of Rama was great. And then the sons of Aditi began to fight with the sons of Diti.
 The Asuras and the Rakshasas united together, all went there, and a great and dreadful battle commenced, O hero, which was capable of stupefying the three worlds.
 When all the worlds had been destroyed, the highly powerful Vishnu, assuming the shape of Mokini, soon brought back the darkness by his illusion.
 Those, who had fought against Vishnu, the foremost of Beings, who had fought against that Being who was immutable and the foremost of all Beings, were all killed by Vishnu who was himself the embodiment of power.
 The heroic sons of Aditi killed the sons of Diti. In this dreadful battle between the Daityas and the Adityas,
 Having slain the sons of Diti and acquired the kingdom, Purandara, highly delighted, ruled over the worlds with all the celestials, animals, birds and reptiles.
 Beholding Kumbhakarna slain by the high-souled Raghava, the Rākşasas informed the Rākşasa prince, Ravana.
 Having routed the monkey-host and devoured the monkeys, and having exhausted himself for a while with his brother's prowess, and having with his person stopped the dreadful sea resembling a mountain, and having with his nose, ears and eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with his eyes resembling a mountain, and having with
 Hearing that Kumbhakarna of dreadful strength had been killed in battle, Ravana, stricken with grief, lost consciousness and fell down.
 Hearing that their paternal uncle had been killed, Devalank and Naralank, Trishira and Atikaya, all wept in grief.
 Hearing that their brother had been killed by the high-souled Rāma of unwearied actions, Mahodara and Mahāpāca became overwhelmed with grief.
 Thereupon, the foremost of the Rakshasas, being stricken with great sorrow at the death of Kumbhakarna and deprived of his senses, began to bewail in a loud voice.
 O hero, O Kumbhakarna, O mighty one, you have been killed by the enemy in battle. You have been carried away by Destiny to the abode of Death.
 O highly powerful hero, having rescued Shalya and your friends from the enemy, what do you go away thus leaving me behind?
 I am not now that I was when my right arm was lost; depending on this right arm of mine, I do not fear the gods and the Asuras.
 How is it that that hero, that one, who was proud of his prowess among the celestials and the Danavas, has been slain by Rāghava today in battle, resembling the fire of dissolution?
 Why are you sleeping on the ground when your thunderbolt can never be shattered in battle?
 And those gods, together with the Rishis, present in the sky, seeing you slain in battle, are filled with joy and are uttering loud shouts.
 And the monkeys today shall, delighted, arriving at the goal, go round the whole city, and shall discover all the secret ways of Lankā.
 I have no work to do without the kingdom; what shall I do, O Sītā, deprived of the kingdom? I have no desire to live without Kumbhakarņa.
 If I do not slay Rāghava, who is a slayer of his brothers, then it is better for me to die; and it is useless for me to live.
 I shall go there today to the country where my younger brother is; without my brothers I cannot live even for a moment.
 The celestials shall laugh at me, seeing me that have been guilty of a former crime; how can I conquer Indra, after you have been slain by me?
 This auspicious speech of Vibhīşaņa has befallen me. By reason of my ignorance, I did not comprehend the words of that high-souled one. And now I have come to know that the destruction of Kumbhakarņa and Prahasta is at hand. And this is dreadful news.
 This is the fruit of that action of mine which I have done, viz., that I have not killed the gracious and virtuous Vibhīşana.
 Thus bewailing in various ways, Kumbhakarna, in great distress, came to know that his younger brother, the enemy of the king of the gods, had been slain.
 Having vanquished Marutta, the lord of the Rakshasas, Dasanana, desirous of fighting with the kings, went to the cities.
 Having reached the kings, who were like Mahendra and Varuna, the Raksasa chief said, "Give me battle." "We have been defeated." This is my fixed determination. If you do not follow it, then you cannot get your freedom."
 Then the highly powerful kings, who were wise and who were firm in their practice of virtue, having consulted with each other, said, "We are vanquished by our enemy as we have seen his great strength.”
 Dushyanta, Suratha, Gada, Gaya, the king Pururavas, these and others of the kings, O child, said, “We have been vanquished." Then arriving at Ayodhya, Ravana, the lord of the Rakshasas, said to that foremost of men, who was like Purandara in prowess, "O king, do you fight with me." (And he further said), “Say, "I have been vanquished" at my command."
 Hearing these words of the wicked-minded one, the king of Ayodhya, being enraged, said to the Rākşasa chief, “O lord of Raksasas, I am ready for a duel with you. Do you wait, being ready for battle. I shall also be ready for it.”
 Thereupon, the large army of that king, the slayer of enemies, having been defeated by that one of great strength who had heard of it before, came out of the city, consisting of ten thousand elephants, ten thousand horses and innumerable cars and infantry.
 Thereupon, O king, began a wonderful battle between the Rākşasa and the forest, O you versed in battle, as also between the king and the Rākşasa.
 Thereupon approaching Rāvana's forces and that of the king, the monkeys were like their life gone out as if burnt in the fire with oblation offered in it. And having fought for a long time and exhibited their great prowess, they in a moment destroyed the Rākşasa host like to a fire consuming all the fuel. And entering the remaining forces, they, like to crickets, entered into the flames.
 Beholding the highly powerful hero thus lost, like a large river falling into a forest of deep and impenetrable waters.
 Then that lord of men, excited with wrath, with a bow resembling a thunder-bolt, shot at Rāvana himself.
 With the exception of those counsellors who had no faith in Rāvana, the rest of his courtiers, including Mārīca, Suka and Rāvana's son Prahasta, fled away in dismay like to deer.
 Then that descendant of the Ikşvāku race discharged eight hundred shafts on the head of that lord of the Rākşasas.
 As water-drops falling from the clouds make no impression on the tops of the mountains, so those arrows of his (Drona's) that were falling did not inflict the slightest injury on him (Arjuna).
 Then the king (Rama) being wounded on the head with the mace by the angry lord of the Rakshasas, fell down from his chariot.
 The king, on falling down on the ground, became extremely agitated and trembled like a Sala tree burnt by the thunder-bolt in a forest.
 Smiling, Raksasa said to Ikşvāku, the lord of earth, "Why did you begin to fight with me? What was the fruit that you obtained?”
 O king of kings, there is no such quarrel in the three worlds as that which you have taken up with me. You are doubtful of my enjoying the fruits of my conquests.
 When he had said this, the king, the son of Mandā, said to him, What can be done in this matter? Time is irresistible.
 I have not been defeated by you, who are proud of your own prowess; I have been baffled by time, but you are the cause of my misfortune. What can I do now, when I am at the point of death? I am not a coward, for I have been slain by you while fighting.
 O Raksasa, if you have given me what I have asked for, if you have offered me oblation, if I have performed the austerest of penances, if you have duly protected all creatures, then may my words be true.
 O Dasaratha, this high-souled descendant of Ikşvāku shall take birth in my line. He shall take away your life.
 Then the clouds, filled with rain, were broken by the sound of the celestial drums; and the flowers that were showered from the sky, ceased to fall.
 Thereupon, O foremost of kings, king Rāvana was transported to the regions of the celestials. And the Rākşasa, having attained the regions of the dead, proceeded towards the place where the dead are.
 Having seen his brother Laksmana awake with a cheerful countenance, Rāma, worked up with the desire for going to the forest, thus spoke to him.
 O child, I have made this soft bed for you. Be comforted in this noble lady who is worthy of you.
 You are the worthy one; we are all deserving of misfortune; you are entitled to happiness. For the sake of the son of Kākutstha, we will all keep wakeful through the night.
 There is no one on earth who is dearer to me than Rāma; I tell you this truly and I also vow this truly.
 By his grace I hope to acquire great fame in this world, and great wealth, and the fulfilment of all my desires.
 I shall, with the permission of all my kinsmen, protect my dear friend Rāma, sleeping with Sītā.
 I have no knowledge of any creature that lives in this forest, I shall therefore, with the aid of the fourfold army, seek to destroy the Asura of great prowess.
 Thereupon Lakşmaņa said: O sinless one, we are not afraid, being protected by you; and we are only following our duty. How shall I be able to sleep, or how shall I be able to live, with Daſaratha's sons lying on the ground with Sītā?
 See, he who is incapable of being vanquished by the gods and the Asuras united together in battle, is now sleeping happily on the grass with Sītā. He who obtained his knowledge of the Mantras by asceticism and by diverse accomplishments, is the son of Dasaratha, resembling in all respects his father. And on the exile of this one, the king shall not long live; and the earth shall, forsooth, soon be a widow.
 And the ladies, crying aloud and being fatigued, thought that the palace was silent in consequence of the cessation of the sounds.
 If, indeed, the queen Kausalyā, my lord, and my mother, and all of them, do not live this night, I shall not live.
 Even if my mother live and witness the defeat of Rāma, I shall not grieve for her, as I shall not grieve for the king when he shall have perished in battle.
 And that city, being filled with those attached to me, being delightful and giving great pleasure, and being connected with the king's calamity, shall be destroyed.
 How will they hold on the life of that high-souled king, having lost his son, the eldest of his children?
 When the king shall have been slain, Kausalyā shall meet with destruction, and immediately after my mother.
 My father shall be destroyed for having renounced his kingdom and for having renounced his desire, after having crossed (the ocean) and crossed (the ocean again).
 Then all those Siddhas, who had attained to their object, when the time came, came to that place where the funeral pyre was blazing. They began to perform the rites of the dead, in the case of Rāghava.
 The city of my father is beautiful, being divided into charming squares, with broad roads, with fine houses and palaces, filled with women of the most beautiful appearance, full of chariots, horses and elephants, resounding with the sound of musical instruments, full of all auspicious objects and inhabited by happy and prosperous people. It is filled with gardens and pleasure grounds and is always resorted to by people of good cheer.
 Even if Dasaratha, going into exile, were to come back, yet should I behold the high-souled one of righteous vows.
 Even though we have performed our vows in the forest, yet with a person of truthful promise and skillful, we may all return to Ayodhyā.
 While the high-souled king was thus engaged in arranging his affairs, and while the prince was still alive, the night passed away.
 When that son of the king spoke the truth, Guha, being affected with compassion, shed tears, as an afflicted elephant sheds tears when affected with fever.
 Hearing those words, the high-souled Ten-necked one spoke to his brother, saying, 'The words that you have uttered are fraught with time, place and benefit.
 What you have said is true; the destruction of messengers is highly improper. But as he is bound to be killed, you must take measures for restraining him.
 The deer are always very fond of ornaments; therefore the fire must be lighted in order to burn down that which is made of the bone of the deer.
 Beholding him reduced to this miserable plight, the kinsmen of Sumitra, along with his friends and relatives, became filled with grief.
 Then the lord of the Rakshasas, on the advice of the fire-fly, commanded the whole of his army with the exception of the Rakshasa Lankapuri, to go home.
 Hearing those words, the Rākşasas, their tempers inflamed with ire, began to wrap his legs with tattered silken cloths.
 The great monkey's gait was increased by the action of his girdle; and he resembled a fire in the forest when he came in contact with dry grass.
 They then poured oil on the fire and set it burning. And the enraged Rākşasa, whose soul was possessed by wrath, with his flaming fingers, began to burn the Rākşasas.
 Having been again received by the cruel Rakshasas, the foremost of monkeys, with one thousand children, youths and old men, went with joy.
 The hero had bound himself to the condition. The Rākşasas were not able to break his bonds. I shall again destroy these Raksasas, rising up and cutting the bonds.
 If a wicked minded wife, on account of her desire to obey her husband's commands, is made to suffer by her husband, I shall not be able to pass my days in peace.
 I can bear all these Rākşasas in battle. But for the satisfaction of Rāma I can bear this also.
 Lankā should be searched again by me; for I have not been able to discover her in the night for want of a means of searching.
 I must certainly go to Lankā by night. Let the monkeys, please, go on to the next shore, with the help of the tail. The Rākşasas do not cause me any trouble, for my mind is not fatigued.
 Thereupon, with great delight, the Rākşasas taking that large and powerful monkey having the figure of a bull, went away, making a great noise with conchs and drums.
 The Rākşasas, of cruel deeds, were guarding that city. And that chastiser of foes, pursued by the Rākşasas, departed, and Hanuman, the mighty monkey, began to search the city of the Rākşasas. And that monkey saw, in that city, numerous and wonderful aerial cars, and the division of the city, and the four principal streets, and the gates, and the terraces, and the palaces, and the streets, and the gates of the inner apartments, and the chariots, and the elephants, and the turrets, and the cars, and the upper and lower storeys, and the inner apartments.
 And the Rākşasas, announcing their approach, cried out “Here we are” in the streets, at the crossings and in the highways.
 Then the Rākşasa Virūpākṣa informed the Goddess of all that had taken place in the forest.
 And the monkey, with a red face, who had conversed with you, is now on fire with the burning flower.
 Hearing that harsh speech of hers, resembling the taking away of life itself, the daughter of the king of Videha, burning with grief, became like to fire.
 Then the great monkey, with eyes like lotus-petals, seeing that her face was turned towards the auspicious spot, came near the Fire-god, with her large eyes fixed on him.
 If you have been engaged in the service of your husband, or if you have been leading an ascetic life, or if you have been observing the vow of monogamy, then indeed do you become a fit wife for Hanuman.
 Thereupon a sharp fire burning with flames on all sides blazed forth, resembling the auspicious fire of the sacrifice of the celestials and which, being the vehicle of the excellent sight, seemed to be moving round the king of monkeys. And a fire of the wind began to blow, cool as the fire of the smoke of the clarified butter and which was propitious to the welfare of the queen.
 While the forest was on fire and while the fruits were burning, the monkey reflected within himself, “Why is my body burning on all sides, like a live fire?"
 I am not feeling any pain from the flames which I see and which are spreading like the cold of winter.
 Or, I have seen with my own eyes, that the hill of the lord of rivers, by the influence of Rāma's power, has been converted into a moving one.
 O Rama, if the fire of the ocean and the intelligent Mainaka be not kindled for your sake, what need of a dreadful conflagration?
 On account of Sītā's compassion, Rāghava's energy, and my father's friendship with me, fire does not burn me.
 And for a while the monkey-chief again thought, “How should we, monkeys, proceed against those worst of the Rākşasas, who have brought about our captivity?
 Then the powerful monkey, tearing off the bonds, began to leap about, and the great monkey roared.
 And as if in the shape of a hill, the son of the Wind-god, having a graceful gate, came to a cross-way, the gate being protected by guards.
 Thereupon the Rishi, assuming the form of a huge mountain, became suddenly freed from the fetters and possessed himself of the highest power. And being freed from the bonds, he acquired the great dignity and became again like a huge mountain.
 And then he saw a mace, which was placed on the gate. And taking that mace, made of iron and copper, that mighty armed Maruti, once more began to kill the Rakshasas.
 And having slain them in battle, that one, possessed of the prowess of a hurricane, again, surveying Lankā, resembling the Sun, having his rays reflected from the blazing gold, appeared like the Sun with his rays reflected from the golden clouds.
 Having consulted with the citizens and his counsellors, the king, intent upon accomplishing his purpose, made up his mind. “To-morrow is the day of the full moon and to-morrow will my son, Rāma, having eyes resembling lotus leaves, be installed as the lord of the kingdom,
 Then entering the inner apartment, king Dasaratha ordered his charioteer, saying, 'Do you bring Rāma here.'
 Having heard those words of the Rākşasa, the charioteer again sped on towards the mansion of Rāma, to bring him back.
 And Rāma had heard that Dvāra had foretold his arrival; and hearing this, he began to doubt.
 Having entered (the room), Rāma said to him, “Let all your work be done, as you had said you would.”
 The charioteer said: O king, the king wishes to see you. Hearing that you have come from a distant land or wish to go back there,
 Hearing these words of the charioteer, Rāma, excited with impatience, went to the palace of the monarch to see him once more. Hearing that Rāma had come, the monarch Daśaratha, wishing for his welfare, admitted him into his apartments.
 Entering his father's house, the graceful Rāghava saw his father from a distance, and bowing down with joined hands, saluted him.
 Then raising Rāma who was bowing down to the earth, and embracing him, the king offered him a seat, and again addressed him thus.
 O Rama, I am old, but my life is long. I have enjoyed all the objects of desire. I have celebrated all sorts of sacrifices with Dakshina consisting of various kinds of food and wealth.
 O foremost of men, my son has been born without any stain, has been given in marriage, and has been duly educated by me.
 O hero, I have enjoyed many pleasant things, as well as all the pleasures that the gods, the Rishis, the Pitrishas and the Brahmanas can give.
 O prince, for the installation you have nothing to do. Therefore I tell you what you should do. O Rama, all the subjects desire you to be their king today. Therefore, I will today install you as the king of the world. O Raghava, O Rama, today I see inauspicious dreams. Fire, thunderbolts, and sparks, are falling.
 The stars, which are inauspicious, have been ascertained by the planets, and the sun, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and the wind, and the moon, and the fire, and
 The king is almost always the cause of the creation of such evil omens, and the king meets with death and suffers great calamities.
 O Rāghava, as long as my mind does not get bewildered, do you perform the ceremony. The mind of every creature is unstable.
 The moon entered Pusya, a month of the spring. The learned astrologers say that he will enter Pusya again on the next day.
 O repressor of foes, do you, after the expiration of the Pushya constellation, speedily install me in the kingdom. I shall then install you in the royal order.
 Therefore, from the very beginning, the wife, of controlled soul, should live with her husband, lying on a bed of Kusha grass.
 Your well-wishers will carefully protect you all around; but there are many hindrances in the way of your work.
 Bharata has been separated from the city from the very beginning. Therefore, I consider that the coronation is due at this time.
 Your brother Bharata, O descendant of Raghu, is your younger brother and he is the eldest of all his brothers. He is righteous, is kind and of controlled senses. And, O Rāghava, what is the use of talking about the fickleness of the mind of men, when you have ever been engaged in the observance of virtue?
 Thus accosted by his father, Rāma, with the permission of his sire, taking his father's leave, went away to his own house.
 Entering his own palace, the king, on the command of the monarch, came out at once and went to the inner apartment of his mother.
 The goddess of wealth saw her mother living in a cottage and dumb in the house of a Brahmana.
 And hearing of the auspicious installation of Rāma, Sumitrā and Laksmana, as also Sītā, had come before.
 At that time Kausalya stood with her eyes fixed on the ground, being attended by Sumantra, Sita and Lakshmana. Hearing that the installation of her son as the heir-apparent had been fixed for the day of Pushya, she was thinking of Janardana in the posture of Pranayama.
 Thereupon Rāma, saluting her in due form, and in the presence of the assembled Brāhmaṇas, joyfully thus said to her, O mother, my father has appointed me to the work of protecting subjects. My father's command is that tomorrow I shall be installed in the kingdom and that you shall observe fasts along with Sītā for one night in my company. And so the preceptor has informed me.
 Do you, O Vaidehī, accomplish the auspicious rites that are proper to the installation of a king and the installation of a queen.
 Hearing these words after a long time, Kausalyā, with a voice choked with tears, said to Rāma.
 O child, O Rāma, these enemies of ours have been killed and you shall live long. You are gifted with auspiciousness, do you make the wife of Sumitra rejoice.
 “O auspicious star, by which you were born, you have made your father Dasharatha honoured with the virtues of a virtuous man.
 O you having eyes like lotus leaves, I am very fortunate that my anger is so easily appeased. O son, the royal dignity of the Ikshvaku race, shall be yours.
 Thus addressed by his mother, Rama smilingly replied to his brother, who was sitting with joined hands and looking at him.
 Do you, with me, protect the earth. I have you for my second self; this prosperity has come to me through you.
 O Sumitra's son, do you enjoy all desirable objects of enjoyment and the fruits of sovereignty. I am willing to preserve your life and sovereignty for your sake.
 Having said this to Lakşmaņa, and saluted his mother, Rāma having given his permission to Sītā, went to his own palace.
 Then Rāma, with joined hands and modesty, asked the ascetic, who was living on the south, these words fraught with meaning.
 The strength of Vāli and Rāvana is incomparable. I do not think Hanuman is equal to both of them.
 The prowess, the skill, the strength, the patience, the wisdom, the power of accomplishing objects, the prowess and the energy of Hanumān are all highly developed.
 Having looked at the sea and seen the monkey-host, the mighty-armed (Rāma) having encouraged his (monkey) brothers, leaped a hundred Yojanas.
 Having entered the inner apartments of Ravana's palace in Lanka and seen Sītā and spoken with her and consoled her, Rāma went to the king of monkeys.
 The sons of the counsellors, the leaders of the army and the servants of Rāvana, were all slain by Hanuman alone.
 And again, on being freed from the fetters, Rāma, having addressed Rāvaņa, burnt down Lankā like the earth by fire.
 The deeds, which Hanumān did in the battle, were never heard of even in the case of Kāla, Śakra, Vişņu and his asceticism.
 Through the prowess of his arms, Lankā, and Sītā, and Lakşmaņa, have been brought by me to victory, and kingdom, and friends, and kinsmen.
 If Hanumān were not the friend of that lord of monkeys, who could know what is the mind of Jānakī?
 Why was not Vāli burnt in the fire of that enmity when the desire of Sugrīva was uppermost in his mind?
 I do not think that Hanumān knew his own strength, seeing that he was witnessing the distress of that lord of monkeys, who was desirous of preserving his life.
 O worshipful and great ascetic, O Hanuman, do you narrate to me in detail all this, O you honoured of all the celestials.
 Hearing the words of Rāghava, well-pleaded and suited to the occasion, the Rși thus spoke to Hanumān.
 O best of monkeys, O Hanumān, what you have said is truly so, for there is none equal to me in strength, none who has gone where I have gone, none whom I have not seen.
 And the curse of the ascetics, that was not ineffectual, was granted to him; and that one, who was a powerful one, and who was the destroyer of foes, did not know his own strength.
 O Rama, you have performed this feat with the help of Vali's might. It is impossible for me to describe this feat of yours. Therefore, I shall not describe it.
 If you have any wish, O descendant of Raghu, what do you wish to hear? Do you wish to hear anything, O Rama, placing your mind on it?
 In this mountain Meru, which is the gift of the sun and is made of gold, lives his father Kesarī who governs his kingdom.
 The wife of Vayu was named Anjana. She bore to him a son, who was the best of all his offspring.
 That foremost of damsels, desirous of obtaining fruits, came out of the forest, having a complexion like that of the ripe Sal or the Shuka fruits.
 Thus distressed with grief on account of his mother's absence and being exceedingly hungry, the child began to cry in piteous tones, like a child deprived of his mother in the forest.
 And beheld the rising sun, resembling a man engaged in the recitation of the Veda, with the flowers and the sacrificial ladle (in his hands), and (therefore) thought of getting the fruits (of his devotions) and (therefore) rose up.
 That child, who was like the sun, that had the sun for his crest-jewel, that had the sun for his own form, that had the sun for his desire, that had the sun for his path, that had the sun for his abode, that had the sun for his body, that had the sun for his form, that had the sun for his eyes, that had the sun for his arms, that had the sun for his senses, that had the sun for his strength, that had the sun for his wealth, that had the sun for his energy, that had the sun for his mind, that had the sun for his intelligence, that had the sun for his mind, that had the sun for his anger, that had the sun for his wrath, that had the sun for his strength, that had the sun for his fame, that had the sun for his beauty, that had the sun for his knowledge, that had the sun for his power, that had the sun for his prosperity, that had the sun for his glory, that had the sun for his happiness, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had the sun for his protector, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his delight, that had the sun for his joy, that had the sun for his refuge, that had the sun for his friend, that had
 When Hanumān was thus playing in the form of a child, the deities and the Dānavas and the Yaksas were all highly delighted.
 Neither the wind, the son of the Wind-god, nor Garuda, the king of birds, is able to go so fast as this foremost of birds (the son of Kunti).
 If the strength of the monkey has been so increased by the contact of the touch of Sītā, why should he not be endowed with great velocity.
 The wind, fearing the heat of the sun, followed his son, who was flying through the sky.
 Many thousand yojanas away from his home, that child, without any food or clothing, and having come to the Sun as the result of his father's and his own weakness,
 Believing that your grandfather knew your sin, the Sun said to himself, "It is proper for me to do this.” And he did not burn him.
 The Moon also, in order to see the Sun, has entered into his rays. The Sun also has entered into his rays, desirous of seeing the Moon.
 By this, Rahu, the enemy of the Sun and Moon, was touched by the Sun; and he was thus alarmed and frightened and he was compelled to turn away from his course.
 And going to the abode of Indra, the son of Simhika, inflamed with wrath, said to the Deity, surrounded by the celestials.
 Having granted me the boon of satiety, O Vasava, what is this boon that you have granted to another? O you destroyer of hostile forces, why have you granted this boon to another?
 Today in the middle of the Parva I was desirous of seeing the Sun. But the Sun had been instantly swallowed up by another Rahu.
 Hearing the words of Rāhu, Indra, worked up with fear, left his seat, and, taking a golden staff in his hand, rose up on the back of Garuda, with Rāhu as his guide. Then mounting the bird with the golden neck, Indra, with his four teeth, resembling the summit of Kailāsa, and emitting the juice of intoxicating liquors, and furnished with the wings of the peacock, and sounding the bells and the cymbals, rose in the air. And, riding on Garuda, he, with Hanumān, went to the sun.
 Then Atirāta, having renounced Vasava, rushed against him, resembling a mountain cleft by an earthquake.
 Then casting off the sun and looking at the fruit (of his success), he again became a Yoma, with the view of swallowing the son of Sinivika (Ravana).
 Abandoning this ape, that monkey, O Rāma, turned his face towards the rear, looking at the animal that had fled.
 The son of Simhika, being anxious to be rescued by Indra, began to call aloud to Indra, saying, O Indra, O Indra, over and over again.
 Before the sound of Rahu's cry was heard, Indra had said, "Fear not; I shall destroy this enemy of yours."
 Beholding that vast elephant, Maruti (Rama) approached that lord of the elephants and said to him, "Take me to the place where the fruit is."
 Then, as he was running, his form, wishing to assume the form of Airāvata, became for a moment as bright as that of Indra and the celestials.
 The lord of Sachi, without being much enraged, struck his antagonist with a Kulisha, a sort of a club, that was in his hand.
 Thereupon, the (Dharmaraja) Yudhishthira, struck by Indra's thunderbolt, fell down on the earth, and his left arm was broken.
 When the thunderbolt hurled by Indra was thrown, the wind, that was the protector of the creatures, became enraged for the welfare of the creatures.
 Having come out of the womb of his daughter, the lord of creatures, the Wind-god, entered the cave, taking with him his son (who was) in the form of a child. And like to Vasava (in the form of) cloud, he afflicted all creatures by obstructing their vital airs and excreta.
 By the anger of the wind all creatures, deprived of breath, were reduced to the state of wood.
 Then the whole world, being deprived of its Vedic recitations and the Vashatkara (mantras), and being without the knowledge of the scriptures, and being deprived of all the sacrifices, and being without the knowledge of the duties of life, was filled with the wind (Yama) in all its three worlds, and became as if it had been sunk into hell.
 Thereupon, the Prajapati, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the celestials, and the men, all afflicted with grief, and desirous of happiness, came to the Prajapati.
 Thereupon the deities, having great bellies, said with folded hands, “O Lord, you have created the four kinds of creatures. O Lord of all creatures, you have granted us this wind as our life. Why, however, O best of men, is that lord of our vital breath, having a hundred sacrifices, now suffering distress as if the city of women were burning?
 Therefore have we sought refuge with you, who have been afflicted by the wind. O dispeller of grief, do you remove this affliction of ours caused by the wind.
 Hearing these words of the people, the king of the creatures, the lord of creatures, said, “I have said that there is a cause for the origin of the universe."
 Hear, you creatures, all that is the cause of the wind's anger and of his becoming feeble. This should be heard by all, for it is the proper thing to hear.
 The son of the king of the celestials, Indra, has been slain today by that Rishi. Having heard the words of Rahu, the wind-god was enraged.
 The life of the body depends on the vital airs. The vital airs depend upon the organs of sense. The vital airs, again, depend on the body. The body depends on the vital airs. The body, without the vital airs, is like a tree without leaves.
 The air is life. The air is happiness. The air is the whole universe. If the air is withdrawn, no happiness can be obtained in the world. The world has been given up by the air which is the giver of life. You have become today breathless, and are like logs of wood.
 O Maruta, you are the giver of strength. Do not let our race come to an end. Do not let us die without having obtained the boon of our son.
 The lord of creation accompanied by his sons, the Gandharvas, the snakes, the Guhyakas, and all the other creatures went there where the son of Maruta was lying, who had been killed by the chief of the celestials.
 Thereupon, the Sun, the Moon, the Wind, and the Fire, having seen the child, and having offered him oblations, began to praise him. The celestials, the Gandharvas, the Rishis, the Yakshas, and the Rakshasas, all began to sing his praise.
 Hearing Angada's words, the self-controlled Sugriva with his ministers rose up, as did Lakshmana, enraged.
 Then, having deliberated over the matter and having acquired the lightness of spirit of a preceptor, the king said to his counsellors, versed in counsels and accomplished in the use of them.
 Nothing that is inauspicious or that is not done, has ever been done by me; what am I to think of the wrath of the brother of Raghu, Lakşmaņa?
 My younger brother Rāma, ever hearing of my faults from my enemies, who are ever on the watch and who are not well-wishers of mine,
 In the matter of the acquisition of knowledge, one should use his judgment, and one should also act according to the ordinances of the scriptures. The conclusions, however, that one should arrive at, are very difficult of being arrived at.
 There is no fear for me from Lakşmana and Rāma. He who is our friend and satisfied with his share of wealth, is the cause of our anxiety.
 A friend is always easy to make, but it is very difficult to maintain. On account of the fickleness of human feelings, even the greatest of friendships soon come to an end.
 I am alarmed at this. It is not for no cause that the magnanimous Rāma has done me a favour. I am incapable of returning that favour.
 Having been thus addressed by Sugrīva, Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys, addressing the monkeys, said in the midst of them,
 O lord of monkeys, it is not at all strange that you do not forget the good offices that have been done you.
 Abandoning fear at a distance, that hero, the highly powerful Vali, has been killed by Rāghava, out of affection for you. And for certain Rāghava has been enraged with his brother, Lakşmaņa, enhancing his glory.
 O foremost of those who are conversant with the nature of time, you are ignorant of the season, though the season of flowers is here.
 The sky without its redness, the stars and planets being lost, the sun having set, the quarters and all the rivers with their waters having disappeared,
 You, O best of monkeys, are not anxious to set out at this auspicious hour. It is evident that Laksmana has come here for sport.
 It behove you to hear the harsh words of the high-souled Rāghava, who has been deprived of his wife and is in distress.
 O Rāma, I do not find any other way to forgive your offence, save excepting the favour which you have done to Laksmana by holding his hand in the water.
 I am a king and therefore I am not to be addressed by my ministers. Therefore I shall, disregarding your words, speak what is for my own good.
 Rāghava, taking up his bow, is capable of subjugating the entire universe, with all the celestials, Asuras and Gandharvas, and is therefore enraged.
 One, who, having been pleased by one, cannot be provoked, and who, after being gratified, does not return to him, should be considered as one who does not remember his former benefactions.
 Then bowing to your husband, with your son and with your friends, do you, O queen, wait on your lord like a wife, in due time.
 O king of monkeys, you should not disregard the command of Rāma, your elder brother. For your mind will understand the human weakness of Rāma, who is like to the lord of celestials.
 And once more did the exceedingly energetic Hanuman, the offspring of the Wind-god, speak in a calm tone, with a view to reassure Sītā.
 O exalted one, I am a monkey and the messenger of the intelligent Rāma. Behold this Anguliya bearing the name of Rāma, which has been brought here as a token of his assurance and which has been given by the high-souled (Rama) for your peace of mind. Be you consoled. Blessed be you! You shall have no cause for grief.
 Taking up the ornament, Janaka's daughter, beholding her husband, as if he had come back to her, became highly delighted.
 As the sun rises after having passed through the clouds, so did the countenance of the princess of Videha, with her eyes as white as silver and having a light colour, appear cheerful.
 Thereupon, that bashful maiden, highly pleased at her husband's request, gratified him with the best of her power and praised the mighty monkey.
 O best of monkeys, you are powerful, you are capable and you are wise. You alone have subdued this Rākşasa land.
 Extending over a hundred yojanas, the ocean, the abode of Makaras, moves slowly like a cow that has been tied with a rope.
 O foremost of monkeys, I do not regard you as a common monkey. Your fearlessness even before Rāvana,
 It behove you, O best of monkeys, to answer me. If you have been sent by Rāma, that subduer of foes, he, knowing you, will not send you without having first ascertained your prowess, particularly before me.
 By good luck, Rāma is well, and is truthful, and is of a pious soul, and is a great warrior, and Laksmana is of exceeding energy, and is the delighter of Sumitra.
 If Kākutstha is well, why does not the earth, as if kindled with the fire of the dissolution, burn with her anger, having the ocean for her girdle?
 Or if they are competent to check even the celestials, I see no fear of any calamity to me.
 Is Rama not afflicted? Is he not pained? Is that foremost of men engaged in the performance of his daily duties?
 Is not your son, O king, afraid of the task of governing the kingdom and does he not lose his presence of mind in the midst of difficulties? Does your son carry out the duties of a man?
 That repressor of foes, who is desirous of attaining to a certain end, seeks the friendship of two sorts of men, viz., those that are friendly to him and those that are neutral in his cause.
 Are your friends in good condition? Do they have many enemies? And is your enemy your friend? And is your friend your enemy?
 O king, is the son of Pritha (Arjuna) pleased with the celestials or is he the slave of Fate?
 Is Rāghava's affection for me gone? Has he forgotten me in his exile? Will Rāghava rescue us from this calamity?
 And he is ever competent to every kind of happiness; but he is not competent to every kind of misery. Having met with misery, does Rāma not feel depressed?
 Do we hear of the welfare of Kausalyā and Sumitrā, and Bharata as well?
 And is it on account of food, that Rāghava is sorrowful; and has his understanding been blighted; and will he take me away?
 Does the brotherly Bharata, the son of Dasaratha, send to me for my well-being the army consisting of an Akshauhini, under the leadership of a standard-bearer and protected by his ministers?
 And is the graceful lord of monkeys, Sugriva, engaged in my service, with those heroic monkeys, furnished with nails and teeth, surrounding him?
 And did the heroic Laksmana, the enhancer of the delight of Sumitrā, by means of his shafts, slay the Raksasas?
 Will I be able to see Rāvana, his wives and his friends within a short time after the encounter with the dreadful weapon of Rāma?
 And is not the face of that one, like to gold, and having the fragrance of the lotus, and is not that one deprived of me, in grief, dry up like to a lotus in a summer drought?
 He who abandons his kingdom in obedience to the precepts of virtue, who takes me to the forest on foot, has no cause for grief. Does the quality of forgiveness reside in his heart?
 I have no father, nor mother, nor any other relative, whom I love more than I love you. As long as I do not hear of the prosperity of my dear friend, I shall not give up my life.
 Having heard those words, sweet and fraught with high sense, uttered by the goddess and well adapted to Rama's interests, Rama was silent.
 Hearing the words of Sītā, the Wind-god of terrible prowess, folding his hands, said these words to her.
 The lotus-eyed Rāma does not know you to be here; therefore he does not take you away, as Purandara does not take away Sachi.
 Hearing our words, Rāghava will speedily repair to the field, with a mighty army, accompanied by monkeys and bears.
 Having rendered the abode of Varuna, incapable of being approached by showers of shafts, the descendant of Kakustha shall reduce the city of Lanka to ashes, along with its inhabitants.
 If the great Asuras and the celestials live there, Rāma will slay them too.
 O worshipful lady, Rāma, deprived of your presence, has been overwhelmed with grief and has no peace like to an elephant smitten with the lion.
 O worshipful lady, as your face is more beautiful than the full moon, I do hereby, with the help of Mandara and the other mountains of the earth, curse you with the curse of the fruits of the trees, the Malaya, the Vindhya, the Meru and the Dardura, so that you may see the face of Rāma as beautiful as the full moon.
 O Vaidehi, you shall soon see Rāma, sitting on the summit of the mountain, like to the celestials-sacrificer on the head of the elephant.
 Rāghava does not take flesh, nor sweetmeats; and he is always feeding on forest fruits arranged with great care.
 Through your own soul, Rāghava, on his person, can neither take up nor carry on his person, arrows, nor mosquitoes, nor bugs, nor worms.
 Rāma is always in meditation, and is always plunged in grief. He thinks of nothing else than Kāma.
 That foremost of men, Rāma, is always wakeful, even when he is asleep; and he awakens as soon as he hears the sweet word Sītā.
 Seeing fruits or flowers or any other beautiful object, he always said in a voice choked with sobs, “Ah! Oh! that is very dear to me.”
 That high-souled and pious son of a king, desirous of obtaining your favours, and always burning with love for you, always addressing you as Sītā, perseveringly and with a fixed vow followed you.
 And the daughter of Videha, the cloud of a moon with a shower of arrows, became like Rāma himself in grief, by means of the grief of Rāma.
 Having entered the great forest called Dandaka, the invincible Rāma, endowed with self-control, saw the encampment of ascetics, adorned with deerskins and covered with the lustre of Brahmani. And like to the sun disc in the sky, he saw that asylum, always providing shelter to all creatures, having its ground well laid and covered with deer and fowls, always worshipped by the Apsarās with dances and songs, filled with huge fire-places, garlands, vessels, cloths, grass and water-pots, and embellished with huge trees, sacred, sweet fruits and roots, sanctified with the oblation of Balis, and filled with the sound of Vedic recitations, and covered with flowers and lotuses, and frequented by men of self-control, clad in yellow and dark-coloured deerskins, and of the complexion of the sun or the fire, and ancient ascetics.
 And by the high-souled Brahmana Rishis, who were pure and who were strict in their observances. And beholding that hermitage, which resembled the abode of Brahma, which was resounded with the sounds of Brahma, and which was beautified by those Brahmanas, who were highly intelligent and who were conversant with the Vedas, Rāma, of great energy, approached the asylum with his mighty bow.
 Seeing Rāma, the ascetics, gifted with knowledge of the celestials, became delighted and approached the illustrious Vaidehi. And seeing Soma-like Soma-like Dharma, and Lakşmaņa, and the illustrious Vaidehi, they, with fixed vows, began to utter benedictions, and then accepted their hospitality.
 And the dwellers of the woods, being astonished, beheld the beauty of Rama's form, his grace, his modesty and his beautiful attire.
 The inhabitants of the forest saw with their eyes which had never been closed before, Vaidehi, Laksmana and Rama, who were quite wonderful.
 There were assembled many great men, always engaged in the welfare of all creatures and they made Rāghava, their guest, to sit on a seat made of palm leaves.
 And having duly honoured Rāma, those greatly blessed ones, observing the religious ordinances, performed their ablutions in the lake.
 And having presented flowers, fruits, roots, and other offerings to the high-souled Rāma, those pious persons, with folded hands, addressed him, saying, O virtuous one, O refuge of the people, O illustrious one, O king, O wielder of the rod, O preceptor, O Rāghava, you are one fourth of Indra, and do you protect the subjects. And after bowing down to Rāghava, he enjoyed agreeable, and precious gifts.
 We are all protected by you whether we live in cities or in woods; you are our king and our lord.
 We have, O king, renounced our anger; we have acquired control over our senses; and we are ever ready to protect you; therefore, you should, O twice-born one, treat us as your children.
 Having thus spoken to Rāghava, and having offered him fruits, roots, and flowers, and various kinds of wild fruits, Lakşmaņa worshipped him.
 The other ascetics, Siddhas, resembling the god of fire, with their heads shorn of their hair, duly welcomed the lord Rāma.
 Then as Vaideha was thus speaking, the mighty ascetic Viśvāmitra, accompanied by Vasiştha, addressed the heroic king, saying.
 O foremost of men, the families of the Ikşvāku and the Videhas are matchless; there is none equal to them.
 O king, like to them in virtue, like to them in beauty, like to them in their possessions, Rāma, Laksmana and Sītā with Oormila.
 O best of men, listen to what I say. This is our brother, our younger brother, the king Kusa with the banner of Kusha. O king, he is the foremost of righteous men on earth. O foremost of men, we desire for sons, for a wife. O king, for the sake of those high-souled brothers, we desire for the sons of Bharata and the intelligent Satrughna. O king, we desire for the sons of that great man.
 These are the sons of Dasaratha, all of them youthful and handsome, and equal to the Lokapālas in prowess.
 O king, be related with both the families. Let the Ikşvāku race be freed from all anxiety on account of your pious deeds.
 Hearing the words of Vishvamitra, Janaka, observing the counsels of Vashishtha, with joined hands said to those foremost of ascetics.
 I consider this my race to be very fortunate, inasmuch as they are the disciples of those two foremost of Rishis, who are equal to them in respect of family and friendship.
 May it be so! May you be well! May this daughter of Kuśadhvaja be the wife of both Bharata and Śatrughna!
 O great ascetic, four kings' sons of great strength shall take the hands of these four princesses.
 On the day of the full moon, the wise men speak of the merits of marriage in the house of the lord of all creatures, the Grandsire.
 Having said these mild words, the king Janaka rose up with joined hands and addressed both the ascetics, saying.
 You have acted most piously in this matter, for I am your disciple. Let these two foremost of Rishis sit on this seat.
 Just as Dasaratha's city of Ayodhyā, so is this my city. There is no doubt about my dominion here. You should do all that you consider proper.
 Hearing the daughter of the king of Videha speak thus, the descendant of Raghu, king Dasaratha, delighted, thus spoke to the lord of earth.
 You are brothers, O you are the rulers of Mithila, and you are endued with every accomplishment. And the ascetics and the kings have worshipped you.
 "Blessings be to you. Be well. We shall now return to our own abode. We shall duly perform the Shraddhas."
 Having thus asked the monarch, Dasaratha, the illustrious king, went away at once with those two best of ascetics before him.
 Having performed the Shraddha according to the ordinance, the king, having risen at the proper hour, and having his body washed, made excellent offerings to the gods.
 That king gave away to each thousand Brahmanas one hundred kine. The king gave them away with a view to get sons.
 O best of men, O descendant of Raghu, that one, fond of his sons, distributed four hundred thousand kine, with their calves and furnished with golden horns, and with brass vessels for milking them, and a great wealth in money, to the Brahmanas, thinking of his sons.
 And surrounded by his sons who had made gifts, the king appeared like the peaceful lord of creatures, surrounded by the Lokapalas.
 When Diti had borne seven sons, she was exceedingly aggrieved and thus spoke to the thousand-eyed Indra, who was difficult to be vanquished, with kind words.
 By my offence this embryo has been divided into seven parts. There is no offence, O lord of the celestials, on your part, O destroyer of the strength of your enemies.
 I wish that the child within my womb may be dear to you. Let the seven Rishis be the protectors of the seven regions.
 O son, these seven, having Vāta for their trunk, shall range the firmament. They are my sons and shall be called Marutas.
 One of them, celebrated under the name of Indraloka, was living in the regions of Brahma. The other was living in the region of Indra, under the name of Divyavayu.
 Those foremost of celestials, O blessed one, at your behest, shall range through the four quarters, and in due time, my sons shall be known by the name of Marutas.
 Hearing those words, the thousand-eyed Purandara, the slayer of Bala, with joined hands, said,
 All this, O son, which I have told you will forsooth come to pass. Blessed be you, your sons, assuming the forms of gods, will range over the earth.
 Having thus made up their minds, the father and the son, O Rāma, went to the celestial region, having attained their end, we have heard.
 O Kākutstha, this is the place where Mahendra formerly lived; and he here practised asceticism, and succeeded in subjugating Diti.
 O foremost of men, that virtuous and illustrious prince was born of the Ikşvāku race in the womb of the Rākşasī, Alambușa. And therefore, the city in which he was born, was called Viśāla.
 Rāma had a son by Viśāla, the greatly powerful Hemachandra, who was celebrated as Sucandra, Hemachandra's successor.
 The son of the sun was called Dhūmrāshva and Dhūmrāshva had a son called Srinjaya.
 The son of Srinjaya is the graceful and powerful Sahadeva. The son of Sahadeva is the exceedingly virtuous Kusa,
 And the highly effulgent Somadatta is the descendant of the powerful Kusha. And the son of Somadatta is Kākutstha, renowned in the world. And that descendant of Kākutstha, the exceedingly effulgent Sumati, incapable of being vanquished, is dwelling in this city.
 By the favour of the Ikşvāku king, all the kings of the Vāriśāla country, high-souled, long-lived, righteous and virtuous, began to live in peace.
 Let us spend this night happily; and, O best of men, in the morning you shall see Janaka.
 Hearing that Vishvamitra had come to him, the highly effulgent and highly illustrious king Sumati came back.
 Having adored Vishvamitra in the proper manner, and having asked him about his welfare, he said to him, with folded hands,
 I am blessed, I am favoured; I have got, O ascetic, an opportunity of seeing your person and of beholding your abode. There is nothing else which I could desire to get more than this.
 Thus did I manage to escape from him in that battle. Hear now what took place subsequently.
 Having been thus addressed by those two Rākşasas, I became cheerful; and in company with those two monkeys I entered Dandaka forest.
 O Ravana, a terrible and a powerful tiger, with burning tongue, with huge teeth, with sharp horns and with great strength, used to range in the forest of Dandaka, and having a taste for the flesh of men, used to kill and eat up the ascetics, who were engaged in performing the Agnihotra (sacrifice) and in taking their baths in the sacred waters and in worshipping the trees and who were living in the forest of Dandaka. And he used to kill the ascetics and drink their blood and eat up their flesh.
 That one, who was cruel and who lived upon the flesh of sages and who used to terrify the dwellers of the forest, was in the Dandaka forest, with blood in his mind.
 Then I, that corrupter of virtue, wandering about in the Dandaka forest, met in that forest the ascetic Rāma, the virtuous, the highly powerful Lakşmaņa, the ascetic, the self-controlled, living on simple diet, and engaged in the welfare of all creatures.
 And I, remembering the old enmity, beholding that highly powerful Rāma, dwelling in the forest, and thinking him a hermit, was highly enraged and ran at him, resembling a deer with sharp horns, with a view to slay him, my mind being bent on the act of vengeance.
 The arrows, whetted, and capable of driving away the enemy and furnished with wings like those of the swans, shot from the bow-string by that hero, all of which were of great size, resembling the clouds, and having the colour of blood, resembling the thunderbolt, and of dreadful appearance, and capable of being devoured by blood, came to him in a body, all having three knots in their shafts.
 That Rākşasa, who knew the prowess of Rāma, and who was a crafty fellow and undaunted, was thus killed by him.
 Having been thus wounded by Rāma I have been able to save my life. And I am now exiled, and have become a mendicant.
 I see Rāma wearing a deer-skin and a dark-coloured cloth, with a bow in his hand, like the destroyer with his noose.
 I see, O Ravana, a thousand Rāmas, I see this forest all is Rāma.
 I see hair, O lord of Rākşasas, after Rāma has gone to sleep. And I do not see Rāma, who has been like life to me.
 O Ravana, the names of Rama's wife, his jewels and his car, make me tremble with fear.
 I know his power; I do not wish to fight with him. The descendant of Raghu, O son, can slay Balin or Namuchi.
 Do you fight with Rāma, O Rāvana, or forgive him. It behove you not to ask me to see Rāma; for I have no desire to behold him.
 Many pious persons, who were ever engaged in the practice of virtue, have been destroyed by the faults of others, along with their wealth and family.
 O night-ranger, I have committed a great sin; I shall be destroyed. Do what is proper, I do not follow you.
 And Rāma is highly effulgent, of high energy, and endowed with great strength. And though he is the destroyer of Raksasas, he is incapable of being slain by the inhabitants of the Rākṣasa region.
 If Khara has been slain by Rāma, having gone to the region of Janasthāna for avenging the wrongs of Surpanakhā, do you describe to me the cause of his defeat, as also the wrongs that he did to Rāma.
 If you do not accede to my advice, which is for your own good, you shall, with your brothers, have to renounce your lives in battle, today slain by Rāma with straight-going arrows.
 Then having slain Vali and installed Sugriva in his kingdom, Rāma, dwelling at the foot of Malyavat, said to Laksmana.
 The time has come; the water will be given to you. See the sky covered with clouds resembling mountains.
 If the child be seven months old, and if the mother have drunk the juice of the rays of the Sun which have been collected by the drops of rain, then the child may be made to be born by the aid of the Rasayana.
 Even the Sun with his chariot drawn by horses and decked with Kutaja and Arjuna flowers can not be seen in the sky with its clouds.
 Then the Pandavas, roused up by the evening wind and their own exertions, appeared as the sky with its rent clouds and blood-stained clouds.
 And the sky, that is made fragrant by the sandal, that is cool with the breeze of the evening, that is covered with the clouds, looks as if it were in love.
 And sore oppressed with pious distress, and having passed through nine several states, and burning with grief, the Earth, even like to Sītā, weepeth.
 Like to the cool and fragrant blossoms of Ketaka, the wind coming out of the clouds can be caught by the hands.
 There the prince Arjuna is seen, having trees all round him and looking as if he is to be installed on the throne like to Sugrīva.
 And like to the hills washed with milk, the caves were filled with the wind and were decked with black silken cloth and the sacred thread for the performance of sacrifices.
 As the clouds (in the sky) produce a terrible and painful sound by striking against the golden peaks of the mountains, so did Rāma's bow make a similar sound by striking against the quiver.
 The spot where Vaidehi, the ascetic, was, appeared like the lightning that flashes in the dark blue clouds.
 These four cardinal points, which are the abodes of Kāma, have been deprived of their respective objects. They are covered with clouds and deprived of the Moon and stars.
 O son of Sumitra, there do I behold on the mountains, the Kutajas, with their flowers, all bent down in grief, and eagerly waiting for the rainy season.
 That army of the monarchs, of which you have been made the commander, is now at peace, the clouds having disappeared. Men, when they have gone abroad, return to their own countries.
 The birds are now in the sky in company with their mates, and they are all in high spirits; but on account of the incessant downpour of rain, the roads are all covered with mud and the vehicles cannot move.
 Now and then the sky appears clear, now and then it seems darkened; and again it seems as if it is covered with water. Now and then it seems to be studded with mountains; and again it appears like a calm ocean.
 The hills and the rivers carry the new water, which is as clear as the crystal, and which is as blue as the sapphire.
 The Jamvu fruit, which is full of juice, has six sides, and which is red, becomes dry. It falls down on the earth, when the wind blows, it is very tasteless, and when it is not ripe.
 And the clouds, coming down with their full strength and having the appearance of a mountain with its summits and its crests, roared like infuriate elephants in the midst of a battle.
 The forests, which are watered by rain, look very beautiful, when they are filled with the noise of music and the clapping of hands and other musical instruments. But when they are dried up by the scorching heat of the sun and the wind, they appear very desolate.
 Carrying water in great vessels, the bearers of water, wandering from one mountain to another, with their cries, come back, having rested on the tops of those high mountains.
 And looking like a garland of blue lotuses, and decked with numerous clouds, the beautiful and graceful bow-string of the blue-eyed (Arjuna), having the hue of the lotus, appeared, having been agitated by the wind.
 The earth looks like a newly painted picture, with its flowers and creepers and trees, with its grass and herbage and plants and flowers. And it looks as if it has been washed with the juice of the sandal tree.
 Sleep approaches Keshava slowly, as a river approaches the ocean, riches approaches Balaka, a beloved wife approaches her husband, and desire approaches a person who has a particular object in view.
 There were many beautiful and fragrant creepers and many Kadamba trees and many other trees with branches covered with blossoms. There were many she-cows with lustful desire and many beautiful fields with crops.
 Rivers and clouds and birds and trees and elephants and all animals, are all grieving, lamenting, and shedding tears, as they are all deprived of their beloved ones.
 And having approached the woods, and drinking the water from the forest fountains, the elephants, with the peacocks, emitting sounds resembling the roar of the clouds, and the neighing of the steeds, began to move about in a happy mood.
 Those trees, which were formerly covered with blossoms, were deprived of their leaves and branches and were broken by the shower of stones; and they were being slowly killed.
 As the branches of the banian tree, spreading themselves over a wide area, appear like six streams of water, so those heroes, wearing garlands of lotus and lilies and the flowers of other plants, appeared like six streams of water, spreading themselves over a wide area.
 And as elephants, eager for battle, appear in their beauty in the water, so the soldiers, displaying their beauty in the field, appeared like clouds of dark rain.
 The leader of the elephant-division, hearing the thunder of the clouds, became afraid and desisted from the onward march, being desirous of fighting.
 Some of them, like the six Padus (of a Sata-Pada composition), sang; and some, like the blue-throated (Garuda), flew off. And some, like to the several branches of a tree, were seen to range in various directions.
 The ground, abounding in Kadamba, Sarja and Arjuna trees, and filled with various sorts of fruits and flowers, looks like a celestial region.
 The clear water that falls from the clouds, pure and limpid, falling into holes made by leaves, is drunk with great pleasure by the delighted birds, their skins of various colours.
 The notes of the birds, that dwelt in the woods, were sweet and melodious, resembling the music of the Gandharvas.
 Some sang with sweet voices, some sang with harsh voices, and some sang with shrill voices, as if in a forest with the notes of birds.
 Those monkeys, having been roused from their deep sleep, began to make various sounds; and they began to send forth various sounds of various shapes, forms and colours, resembling the sound of the sea when its surface is agitated by the wind.
 And they then, having washed their feet and dried them with their clothes and taken their food and done other offices and having bathed in the morning, they began to go to their respective husbands, carrying with them the water that had been used by them in washing their feet.
 And like to dark clouds in dark clouds, and like to flames in flames, and like to mountains in mountains, those that were fast bound together, appeared as if burnt by fire.
 And in the midst of the woods, the elephants, ranging in pairs, were going about, those charming woods inhabited by the Arjuna and the Nipas.
 And bees, full of delight, are drinking the nectar of new Kadamba flowers, with their filaments, and flowers of new lotuses, which have been moistened by the waters of the sea.
 The elephants are delighted. The bulls are proud in the forest. The lions are proud in their strength. The kings of the hills are delighted. The king of the celestials is pleased with the kings of the rivers.
 Clouds have arisen, and the ocean is roaring. And the clouds, taking up large quantities of water, are covering the sky. And they are carrying away the entire Earth.
 And the winds, having their force increased, are pouring down rain in profusion. And the currents of rivers, deprived of their banks, are bearing their waters to other quarters.
 Like mountains by the Indra, the lords of men, when they are adorned by the clouds, carrying the rains sent by the lord of the celestials, appear in their beauty and their grace.
 The sky covered with clouds cannot be seen by the Sun or the Moon; the earth is gratified with showers of water; and the quarters are enveloped in darkness.
 The trees of the mountain, shaken by the wind, are producing a mighty sound; and the sounds of the trees are louder than the sound of the thunder.
 There are many precipices, and the crevices of the hills, and vast precipices, and the caverns, and the hollows of the hills, filled with the cries of lions and leopards, and the echoes of the voices of birds, and the cries of jackals.
 The huge and steep precipices of the mountains with their sides and plateaus, resembling the swift and well-strung bow, fall with a sound resembling that of the rattling of the clouds and the crashing of thunder, into the great caverns and sink into their depths.
 The celestials have been robbed of their joy and the rivers of their crystal waters. And the celestials are falling in all directions.
 The sun has gone down, for the birds have ceased to sing, and the lotuses are closing their leaves and the night-blooming jasmines are opening their buds.
 The path of the kings is their own army. Their friends and enemies are like the water of their way.
 O Brahmana, on the occasion of the expiration of the Prustapada month, the time for the recital of the Samans has come.
 Forsooth, the lord of Kosala, Bharata, has reached the month of Asvina, after having been absent for a long time, and has returned with his treasury and retinue.
 Truly the wealth of the Sarayu is increasing, seeing me come hither, like the noise of the city of Ayodhyā.
 Let Sugriva enjoy the fruits of the season, being the victorious lord of the kingdom, with his wife, and the entire kingdom at his command.
 I have been deprived of my wife and kingdom and have been cast off from a mighty throne. I am, O Laksmana, like to a tree by the side of a stream.
 And my grief is wide-spread and difficult of endurance for a long time; and Rāvana, the mighty enemy, appears to me as impassable.
 Having seen the route difficult to be travelled over and Sugrīva's prostration to me I have not said anything (to him).
 I do not wish to talk to that monkey who has been oppressed by his wives for a long time, and who is engaged in doing the work of another.
 Having himself ascertained the time, Sugriva shall surely be aware of the help I have rendered him.
 Therefore, I have waited in expectation of time, O auspicious lady, and have been here, desiring the favour of Sugrīva and of the rivers.
 A hero, who does not return the favour of another, is sure to be the object of his resentment. An ungrateful man is sure to be the object of ungratified men.
 Being thus addressed, Lakşmaņa, with joined hands, bowing to Rāma, said, to Rāma, displaying his graceful person, and his own excellent beauty.
 All that you desire, O king, will be accomplished by me soon. You will soon be the lord of the three worlds. You are patient, and ready for action, and so you will be able to bear the burden of the waters when they shall be let loose.
 The king sent word to Rama, "To-morrow I will install the queen on the throne." Summoning his priest, Vasishtha, he said to him.
 Do you, O ascetic, go to Kākutstha and inform him that I, with my wife observing the vow, have gone on a fast for the attainment of the kingdom which is for my good.
 Then the best of those conversant with the Vedas, saying, "So be it," went himself to the abode of Rāma, that hero, versed in the science of Mantras and having his mind fixed on one object, in order to keep that heroic ascetic on a fast. Then taking a car yoked with excellent horses, and having his mind fixed on one object, the worshipful Vasistha proceeded to the abode of Rāma.
 And having come to Rāma's mansion resembling a mass of white clouds, that foremost of ascetics, ascended his car and entered the inner apartment.
 Rāma seeing the ascetic arrive in haste and with fear, received him with due respect and went out of his mansion.
 And coming there, the intelligent priest, desiring to see the car, alighted from it himself, and then descended to the ground. And seeing him, and having consoled him, the priest, with a cheerful countenance, said to Rāma, “I am highly pleased with you."
 Be pleased, O Rāma, and you shall regain the kingdom. Do you observe fast with Sītā to-day.
 The king, your father, the lord of men, has this morning installed you in the royal office, as Yayāti did Nahusa.
 Having said this, that one of controlled senses, observing a fast and with his mind fixed on the deity, caused a pure sacrifice to be celebrated, with Vaidehi, according to the ordinances of the Vedas.
 And having been duly honoured by Rama, the king, leaving Kākutstha, went away from Rama's abode.
 Surrounded by his beloved and affectionate friends, Rama entered the assembly hall, after having asked the permission of all present.
 The mansion of Rama, then, appeared like to a lake with its waters in full flood, and full of elephants and deer.
 Thereupon coming out from that magnificent palace resembling the palace of the king, resembling that of Rāma, he saw Vasistha surrounded by people.
 The roads leading to Ayodhyā were thronged with people of all ages, who were desirous of seeing the coronation of Rāma.
 The sound of the crowd that rushed on, mingled with the rattle of the cars and the shouts of joy, resembled the roar of the ocean.
 The city of Ayodhyā, having been washed by the rain and having its streets sprinkled with dust, looked beautiful with its houses and standards erected.
 And desiring the installation of Rāma, and the rising of the Sun, Ayodhyā, with her women and children and troops, looked like the earth covered with clouds.
 And the people's joy, and the ornament of the kingdom, the citizens were eager to see the great festivities of Ayodhyā.
 Thus, as if collecting the people, the priest led the royal procession slowly through the crowd.
 Then ascending the palace resembling the summit of a mountain covered with white clouds, and resembling the palace of Shakra (Indra), the king of men (Rāma) sat down on the seat meant for the king.
 Beholding him come, the king left his throne and asked him, "What is your wish?"
 Then all the courtiers, being equally honoured by him, got up from their seats, and worshipped the priest.
 And having sent out that host, with the permission of his preceptor, the king, like a lion entering a cave, entered his inner apartments.
 Having lighted the excellent palace, that abode of Indra, resembling the palace of the king of the celestials, and having its inmates agitated with the fear of death, the king entered the palace that was beautiful and the sky that was crowded with stars in the evening.
 When the night was over, the king went to the sacrificial ground, and the highly effulgent descendant of Raghu summoned all the Rishis, viz., Vashishtha, Vamadeva, Jabali, Kashyapa, Vishvamitra, Dirghatama, Durbasa of austere penances, Pulastya, Shakti, Bhrigu, Markandeya of long life, the illustrious Audalgaya, Garga, Chyavana, Shatananda, Dharma, the highly energetic Bharadvaja, Agniputra of bright splendour, Narada, Parvata, Gautama of great fame, and many other ascetics of rigid vows, all greatly eager to witness the performance. The highly powerful Rakshasas and the mighty monkeys also came there from curiosity.
 And Brahmanas of rigid vows, who were in various countries, came there, to search for Sita. Thereupon, hearing of the assembly of all those ascetics, like a hill of ashes, the foremost of ascetics with Sita came there speedily.
 And Sītā, turning her face away, followed that ascetic, with her hands clasped, and with tears in her eyes, thinking of Rāma. And seeing Sītā following Brahmā, Vālmīki spoke these words in the rear of the latter.
 Then there arose a loud noise from all sides, on account of the great sorrow of those who were afflicted with it. Some said, “O good Rāma,” and others, “O good Sītā," and others, again, "O you two.”
 Then entering into the midst of the host, that best of ascetics, Valmiki, accompanied by Sītā, said to Rāghava, 'This is Sītā, O Daśaratha's son, of excellent vows and of righteous conduct. She has been renounced by me for her transgression in the very midst of my hermitage.
 O Rāma of mighty vows, be not afraid of the censure of men. Do you give your consent to Sītā. It behoves you to grant her permission.
 These are the two sons of Janaka; and these, O Yama's descendant, are your children; I speak truly to you; O Raghava's son, I am the tenth son of Pracheta; I do not remember having told an untruth; these are your two sons.
 I have for many thousand years practised austerities. If this wicked daughter of the king of Mithilā, does not give me the fruits of those austerities,
 If Maithili be really virtuous, then she should not have to suffer the fruit of my former sinful deeds, as I have not committed any sin through my mind, my speech or my actions.
 O Raghava, reflecting on the five elements and the mind and the soul, I was able to know that Sītā was pure, and therefore I took her up from the forest.
 This pure minded and chaste wife of yours, ever devoted to you, shall give you the assurance you seek.
 Therefore, O son of a human being, it is proper that you should know that I have seen your wife in a state of chastity, as I am gifted with the power of celestial vision.
 Thus addressed, Vaidehī, who was fond of her husband, and who was ever ready to speak sweet words to him, was filled with anger, and thus spoke to her husband,
 Why did you speak these words so quickly, O Rāma, O foremost of men? Hearing these words of yours, I am greatly disappointed.
 O king, it is not proper for you to hear that those heroic princes, those well-skilled in the use of weapons, have been slain.
 O son of a noble father, the father, the mother, the brother, the son, the daughter-in-law, all enjoy their own respective good fortunes, and their respective good deeds. But one woman alone, O best of men, enjoys the good fortune of her husband. It is for this that I have been commanded to live in the forest.
 Neither father nor son, neither self nor friends, neither mother nor companions are one's husbands in the next world.
 If, O Rāghava, you today set out for the forest, I shall go before you, clearing your way through the thickets of reeds and grass.
 I have, O hero, renounced my anger as if I have drunk the full quantity of water. Have confidence in me, O hero, for I am innocent of this sin.
 When the husband is absent, the shadow of his feet is considered as the best shelter on the terrace of the palace or on the top of the car or on the wings of the car.
 My mother and father have instructed me in many ways; but I do not now know how I should act, as I have been instructed by them.
 I shall repair to a lonely forest inhabited by none. It is filled with many animals and is frequented by wolves.
 I shall pass my life in the forest like my father in his palace, without thinking of the three worlds and thinking of my husband.
 Always serving you and leading the life of a Brahmachari, I shall enjoy with you in the forest, abounding in the fragrance of Madhukai.
 O Rama, you are capable of protecting me in the forest. What need I say, O giver of honours, of others?
 O exalted one, forsooth, shall I today repair to the forest. I cannot, O exalted one, restrain myself who am ready (to depart).
 Forsooth, I shall daily live on fruits and roots. And I shall never give you any pain, living always with you.
 I shall go before you; and after you have eaten, I shall eat. I wish to see more hills and more forests and more lakes.
 O you who are the refuge of all, I wish to behold you in every place, for I am not afraid of you, O you of great intelligence. I wish to behold the lake full of swans and cranes and adorned with lotuses and flowers and frequented by the virtuous. I wish to perform the ablution in them and ever remain devoted to you, O you of expansive eyes. I wish to sport in great happiness with you, O you that give great delight. I shall not count even a thousand years in your company, O you that are the delight of the three worlds. Even in heaven I shall not be content without you, O Rāghava. Without you, O foremost of men, I shall not be content even in heaven.
 I shall go to a forest that is difficult to penetrate and abounds in animals, and monkeys and bears. I shall live there, as my father lived in his house, and as you yourself live in the house of your father, taking his feet for my refuge.
 I am devoted to you; my mind is attached to you; I have decided to die with you; take me to death, O you of good conduct, do you accept my request, otherwise I shall be greatly distressed.
 When she was thus speaking, the king did not at all turn away from the virtuous Sītā. And he spoke to her thus, when she desired to return to the forest, and when she was sorry for the prospect of her residence in the forest.
 Hearing these words, Rāghava along with his brothers felt great delight. And Rāghava addressed his brothers with words resembling those of an ascetic.
 O son of Sumitrā, these two sons of yours, learned in the precepts of virtue, Angada and Chandraketa, endowed with firmness of purpose, are engaged in the business of the kingdom.
 I shall install these princes on the throne. Do you select a proper place for the ceremony. Let it be charming and free from every inconvenience. Let the two princes enjoy themselves there.
 Where there is no oppression of the kings and no destruction of the hermitages, that region, O mild one, should be seen, and we shall not commit any offence.
 When Rāma had said this, Bharata replied, saying, This is a pleasant and healthful country.
 Let the city of the high-souled Angada, Chandraketu, Chandra-Kanta and free from every kind of calamity, be built there.
 Having said these words, Rāma accepted Bharata's proposal, and bringing under control that region, placed it under Angada's rule.
 Rāma, of facile actions, having brought the beautiful city of Angada, Angada's wife, and the city itself, under his subjection, lived there in great delight.
 The king of the Mallas, living on the Mallabhumi, was known by the name of Chandrakanta and his capital was like the celestial city itself.
 Then Rāma and Lakşmaņa and Bharata were highly pleased. And those two invincible ones were installed in their respective kingdoms; and they then set out on their respective ways. And Sumitra's son, Lakşmaņa, sent Angada to the western quarter of the country, looking like the moon. And Sumitra's son, Lakşmaņa, followed Angada. And Bharata became the lord of the Pahrkás.
 Having remained a whole year in Angada's dominions, Lakşmaņa, when his son had become invincible, again returned to Ayodhyā.
 Bharata also, thus spending the year and more, came back to Ayodhyā and began to live near the feet of Rāma.
 Even after the lapse of time, those two sons of Sumitra, who were ever attached to Rāma, still retain the affection which they entertained for him.
 Thus ten thousand years passed away for those who were ever engaged in the discharge of their duties and in the practice of virtue.
 Having thus passed a long time, those three celestials (Agni, Surya and Chandra) placed themselves on the sacred altar in the kingdom of Dharma, all of them blazing in energy and fire, like three sacrificial fires.
 Having thus told Rāma, the Maharşi Kumbhasambhava began to relate another story.
 Thereafter, the self-controlled Kakutstha (Rāma) ruled over the kingdom for many years, having rid it of its thorns.
 Thereupon at an opportune moment the king went to the hermitage of the descendant of Bhrigu, which was highly agreeable and which was in the spring season.
 There he saw in the forest a maiden of the race of Bhrigu, peerless in beauty. Danda, being afflicted with the arrows of Cupid, saw her and with a trembling heart came near her and said.
 O you of a beautiful face, where are you? And whose daughter are you? I am aggrieved for the loss of my love; therefore, I ask you, O you having a beautiful face.
 As he thus spoke, lost to his senses, in a state of stupefaction, the daughter of Bhrigu, spoke these gentle words to him.
 O king, I am the daughter of the illustrious Vidura, the son of the Kshatriya king, Devavrata of infallible actions, named Arjana, the eldest daughter of the ascetic family. Do not touch me forcibly, O king, I am under the control of my father. O king, you are my preceptor and father of the great-souled Mahadeva.
 If you want to do any other work, which is not sanctioned by virtue and which is not good, then this great ascetic will not give you the boon. Ask for your father of great effulgence.
 This father of mine, by his anger, can consume the three worlds, and therefore, O you having beautiful limbs, do not ask your father.
 While the king was thus speaking to the virtuous Danda, the latter, possessed by the god of lust, said, bowing his head down,
 O fair-hipped one, do you show mercy, you should not kill me, O fair-hipped one, for your sake my life is ebbing away. O fair-hipped one, by having you, I shall be killed or subjected to some dreadful calamity. O timid one, do you accept me as your devoted slave who am so much excited with the desire of having you.
 Having said so, the monkey, entering by force the room, began to sport with the maiden, who, being unable to move, was emitting low sounds of pain. And, having perpetrated this dreadful and iniquitous act, Danda, taking up a goodly lotus, went away to the city Madhumantaka.
 Although not yet having performed her Rajas (menstrual rites), the damsel, with a sorrowful countenance, waited for her father, who resembled a celestial, in the very asylum.
 While Danda thus spoke, the other, crazed with lust, thus replied, folding his hands and bowing his head.
 O you having beautiful hips, be pleased with me; it does not behove you to take your time. O you having beautiful countenance, for your sake my life is departing. Either you will give me death or some dreadful calamity. O timid damsel, do you accept me, who am devoted to you, who am in a state of ecstasy and who am so eager to serve you.
 Having said these words to that damsel, and forcibly carrying her off with both his hands, he began to sport with her as he pleased. Then Danda, having put her to great pain by his harsh and cruel punishment, went to the city of Madhumanta, an excellent one.
 And weeping in vain, she sits at the asylum within a short distance from it, waiting for her father resembling the god himself.
 That best of the Rakshasas of immeasurable prowess, was greatly fatigued with sleep. And he went by the way that was frequented by the kings, and that was filled with prosperity.
 That invincible hero was surrounded by a thousand Rākşasas. And he, being showered with flowers from the balconies, went away.
 He saw the spacious and charming mansion of the lord of the Rakshasas, decked with golden network and resplendent with the splendour of the sun.
 Then entering the palace of the king of the Rakshasas, he saw his elder brother seated at a distance like Shakra seated at the abode of the self-sprung Indra.
 Thereupon Kumbhakarņa, accompanied by the Raksasas, went to the abode of his brother, and shaking the earth with his tread, sat himself down.
 He then went to his brother's house, and seeing the preceptor in the car of Pushpaka, sat down on a seat placed by him.
 Seeing Kumbhakarma before him, the Ten-necked demon, quickly rising up, with a cheerful heart, went to him.
 The highly powerful Kumbhakarna, sitting on the bed, bowed to his brother's feet and asked, "What shall I do?"
 Rāvana, again, having his spirits exhilarated, embraced him. And having been embraced by his brother, he was highly delighted.
 Kumbhakarna, having received a celestial boon, slept for a long period. Thereupon, the highly powerful Kumbhakarna, sitting on his celestial bed, with his eyes red with rage, said these words to Ravana.
 Why did you not take me into your confidence and why did you not tell me that you were afraid of Rāvaņa, and that the cause of your fear was the angry Kumbhakarma, who was standing there?
 O you of great strength, this is the time of your great trial. You are asleep, and do not know the terror I have in store for you.
 This handsome son of Dasaratha along with Sugriva, having crossed the sea, is destroying our race.
 Behold, in Lanka there are woods and forests, and a bridge has been constructed here, by which the monkeys have made this ocean dry.
 I do not see any calamity coming to the monkeys in this battle, as they have killed the foremost of the Rakshasas in this fight. I do not see the monkeys ever vanquished in battle.
 O greatly powerful one, this fear has arisen. O you that know the truth, save us for this reason.
 Come to me, you who have a treasury filled with all kinds of wealth. Do you save this city of Lankā, with its children and old people.
 Do you, O you of mighty arms, perform this difficult feat in the interests of your brother. I do not recollect any one, O scorcher of foes, who has not spoken thus before.
 There is affection for you in me, and great expectation also. O foremost of Rakshasas, in many a conflict between the celestials and the Asuras.
 Do you set to work, O you of great prowess and might, and do you exert yourself to the utmost. For there is no one equal to you in strength among all creatures.
 O best of men, O friend, do you, at my command, what is for your own good and what is for your own happiness. Do you, with your own energy, afflict your enemy's army like the wind in autumn.
 Having given Hanuman the gem, Sītā said: "You have truly understood Rāma as he is in reality."
 Seeing this gem, Rama will remember me, his mother, and king Dasaratha.
 Therefore, O foremost of monkeys, do you, encouraged by me, set your heart on this work. And reflect what is to be done next.
 O foremost of monkeys, you are the proof of our exertions in this work. Therefore do you take pains to find out a remedy for our grief.
 'By your exertions you shall remove the grief of Sītā.' Having thus promised, that one of terrific prowess, bowing his head to Vaidehi, set out on his journey.
 Knowing that the Wind-god's son, the monkey, had set out, the princess of Mithilā, with her voice choked with tears, said,
 And speak of Hanumān, and Rāma, and Laksmana, and Sugriva, and his counsellors, and all the elder monkeys, O foremost of monkeys, the welfare of all, and their virtuous practices.
 Even as that mighty-armed Rāghava is relieving me of my distress, it behoves you to bear up under this grief.
 As the famous Rāma makes me feel that I am alive, so, O Hanuman, do you act towards me, and do you acquire virtue by your speech.
 Hearing the words of that always cheerful one, I shall be excited and Dasharatha's son shall be encouraged to accomplish my purpose.
 O Rāghava, having heard your words, that hero, (Rāma) shall, according to the proper procedure, take counsel with regard to his prowess.
 Hearing the words of Sītā, Hanuman, the son of the Windgod, with his head bent down, said.
 And the descendant of Kakustha shall soon come to you, surrounded by the foremost monkeys, and by subduing you in battle shall make you feel no grief.
 I do not find a single hero amongst the celestials, Asuras or mortals who would be able to withstand the arrows shot by him.
 He is capable of bearing even the sun, the moon, the rain and the very Death himself, that repressor of all creatures, in battle, especially for your sake.
 He is capable of subjugating the earth that extends to the sea. O daughter of Janaka, victory is sure for Rāma at your hands.
 Hearing his words, which were true and well-said, Janaka's daughter, highly esteemed them, and spoke thus.
 Then, as her husband repeatedly went out, Sītā, gazing at him, understood from his affectionate words the feeling of his heart.
 If, O hero, O repressor of your foes, you think that it is proper for you to rest in some place, you will tomorrow proceed from that place.
 O monkey, the calamity that has befallen us has been brought about by my misfortune. By your help I may be able to bear this great grief.
 O best of monkeys, it is certain that if I go away again, I shall be deprived of my life.
 O monkey, my grief on your absence is augmented by the recollection of your words, which are like a torch to me in my deep sorrow.
 O hero, this doubt is troubling me, namely, how can that lord of the monkeys, the exceedingly powerful Sugrīva with your help, cross over that mighty ocean, when the monkey-host, or those two princes of men,
 Is it the prowess of the son of Vinata, or of the Wind-god, that has enabled them to cross the three worlds as well as this ocean?
 When the work was thus carried on, what did you, O hero, that was incapable of being defeated, think of it? You are the best of those conversant with work.
 You are the only one that is competent to carry out this work. O destroyer of foes of your enemies, you are the only one who can confer fame on you.
 Having defeated Ravana in battle, with all his forces, I shall return to my city; and my return shall be worthy of that victory.
 Having filled Lankā with troops, if Kākutstha take me away, then it will be worthy of him.
 As the heroic (Bhima) is well fitted to the great prowess of that high-souled one (Arjuna), so do you make ready.
 Hearing the whole of Hanumān's speech, which was sweet and rational, and had been uttered for the purpose of inducing him to do what he was requested to do, Rāma replied.
 O goddess, Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, is the foremost of all those that can move about, and he is always devoted to your cause.
 Surrounded by thousands of kotis of monkeys, he will soon come, O Vaidehi, for destroying the Rākşasas.
 Under the direction of that one of wonderful prowess, the powerful monkeys, endowed with courage, ever ready to execute his will, were stationed (on the field of battle); there was none superior to them, none inferior, none between them, nor was their energy ever diminished in mighty enterprises.
 In consequence of the great energy of those monkeys, the earth, with the sea, was many a time encircled by them, as they followed the track of the wind.
 There are monkeys, some superior to me, some equal to me and some inferior to me. But none equal to me is to be seen in the presence of Sugrīva.
 I have come here. What shall I do with those powerful heroes? They are not to be sent out for service, for the others are to be sent out for service.
 O worshipful one, let not your grief increase in consequence of the disaster which has befallen you. By a single disaster, the monkeys shall come to Lankā. O you of beautiful hips, those two leading monkeys, resembling the sun and the moon, shall approach you, while I shall be following them like a lion.
 And those two heroes, Rāma and Laksmana, uniting, shall, arriving at the city of Lankā, slay (Ravana) with their shafts.
 Having destroyed Rāvana with his force, Rāghava, the delighter of Raghus, shall, O you of excellent thighs, take you to his capital.
 Be comforted, good betide you, you shall soon behold Rāma, like to a flaming fire.
 After the death of the Raksasa lord with his sons, ministers and friends, you shall meet Rāma, like Rohiņi meeting the Moon.
 O Maithili, you shall speedily cross over the other shore of grief. You shall also behold Rāvana slain by force of Rāma.
 Saying this to the daughter of the king of Videha, Hanumān, the son of the wind-god, thinking that it was time for departure, again addressed her, saying.
 You shall soon see the son of Raghu, having subdued the enemy, his soul under control, and Lakshmana with his bow, come to the gate of Lankā.
 Soon you shall see your friends, the monkeys, possessed of the prowess of lions and tigers and armed with nails and teeth, and resembling elephants in size.
 And, O prince, the foremost monkeys, resembling mountains and clouds, were making a din in the woods of Lankā.
 Rāma, being thus pierced with the shafts of Manmatha, experienced no delight, like to an elephant afflicted with the lion.
 O lady, do not grieve and do not give way to any kind of mental disquietude. O beautiful lady, you shall have the same intercourse with me as Shachi had with Shakra.
 Who is superior to Rāma? Who is equal to Sumitrā's son? Those two brothers are like fire and wind in speed and energy.
 You shall not long live in this dreadful country, inhabited by Rakshasas. Do not, therefore, long wait for the arrival of your dear one. Let your stay be short.
 Going to the hermitage of Bharadvaja, that foremost of men, placing all his subjects under the charge of the ministers, set out with them. The virtuous king, placing his weapons and other appurtenances aside, proceeded, wearing a piece of cloth of goat-skin for his upper garment.
 Then on seeing Bharadvāja, Rāghava, without consulting his ministers, went away with his priest.
 Seeing Vasishtha, Bharadvaja, of rigid austerities, immediately rose up from his seat and addressed his disciples, saying, "This is the most auspicious moment (for performing a sacrifice).
 Meeting with Vasistha and saluted by Bharata, the highly powerful (Rama) was not surprised at the arrival of his father's son.
 Having performed the ceremony of presenting water to wash the feet, and having offered him fruits, the virtuous Rāma, knowing the welfare of his family, asked after the welfare of Ayodhyā, and of his army, and of his treasury, and of his friends, and of his counsellors. But he did not mention the king, Dasharatha.
 Vasishtha and Bharata both asked him about the name of the remedy which was without any injurious effect. He said, It exists in the body, in the sacrificial fires, in the disciples, in trees, in animals and in birds.
 Then the highly famous Bharadvāja, saying, "Be it so," addressed Bharata from affection for Rāghava, saying.
 Why, therefore, did you come here? You are the king, and yet you have not told me all this. I have no peace of mind.
 Kausalyā gave birth to that destroyer of foes, the enhancer of Ananda, Yama, in the company of his brother. His father, for the sake of his wife, sent him to the forest for a long time. O king, do you desire to perpetrate an iniquitous deed on that blameless person? Do you desire to eat the kingdom of that one who has no thorn in it, together with the kingdom of his younger brother?
 Thus addressed, Bharata, with eyes reddened with grief, in reply to Bharadvāja, spoke with a voice choked with grief.
 If the divine one regards me as slain, I do not entertain any suspicion of him. Do you then, O holy one, direct me as you please.
 My mother was not pleased with me, when I did not accept her words. I was not pleased with her words, therefore I did not accept them.
 I, too, desirous of doing him a favour, went to that best of men to take him back to Ayodhyā and to bow my head to his feet.
 Consider me as your slave, and do you show me your grace. O Lord, tell me where the king Rāma is now.
 Then Bharadvāja, being requested by those gods headed by Vasiștha, spoke to Bharata these gracious words in favour of Rāma.
 This is what is proper for you, O you of great prowess. O you of the Rāghava race, follow your preceptor's counsel and be self-controlled and obedient to the good.
 I know that this your heart has been fixed on this subject. I therefore did not ask you about it, desirous as I was of your honour.
 I know that Rāma is virtuous, and that he is accompanied by Sītā and Lakşmaņa. This your brother is living in the great hill Citrakūta.
 I shall send you to that country with my ministers. Do you, O you of great wisdom, O you that know all about the objects of desire, do you so arrange that I may have what I desire.
 Then Bharata of liberal vision, with his face turned towards the ground, said, “So be it," and then that scion of a king's race, in that hermitage, made up his mind to live in the woods by night like a night-ranger.
 Then, commanded by the king of the Rakshasas, the seven sons of his ministers of great energy issued out of that palace.
 And with those who were endued with great strength and with mighty arms, and who were accomplished in every kind of weapons, and who were the foremost of those conversant with the science of weapons, and who were desirous of securing victory over each other. And having their banners, standards, and flags decked with chains of gold, and having the sounds of their cars resounding in the air, and having their steeds yoked to their cars, and having their cars of excellent make and variegated with gold, those of immeasurable prowess, stretching their bows, were joyfully discharging their arrows like masses of clouds. And beholding their kinsmen and servants slain, their friends and relatives, as well as the people, became filled with grief.
 And those adorned with golden ornaments, rushing against one another, attacked Hanumān standing in front of the gate.
 Your arrows, resembling clouds in the rainy season, fell with the noise of cars, like masses of water charged with lightning and thunder.
 Then Hanuman, wounded by those showers of arrows, appeared as if covered with clouds.
 That monkey, who was the foremost of the heroes, began to delude the arrows of the enemy in the clear sky, when the heroes of the monkey host were running with the speed of cars.
 And that hero shone in the midst of those men, like the Wind-god in the midst of the clouds.
 And producing a terrible uproar, and frightening the mighty host, the puissant Hanumān agitated them.
 That repressor of foes, with his palms and his feet and his clenched fists and with his nails, cut down some trees. He then crushed some others with his breasts and with his two arms. Some trees were thus felled to the ground by the sound of his voice alone.
 The earth being covered with the bodies of the slain and the wounded, the army of the Pandavas, struck with fear, fled away in all directions.
 Elephants roared with various cries and horses fell on the ground. The car-warriors were scattered over the field, their standards, umbrellas and flags having been broken down.
 And blood began to flow in the streets, and various kinds of cries arose from Lankā.
 Having killed those Rākṣasas, that powerful monkey endowed with terrific prowess, went to the gate, like to a heroic lion.
 And as the spotless and aggrieved Damayanti, whose joy had departed, and whose mind was weighed down, thus came, she met with auspicious signs, like one who has been blessed with prosperity and who is attended by prosperity.
 O Krishna, the eyes of this lady of beautiful hair are covered by a large pair of white eyelids; her large eyes, like the lotus, are being moistened with tears.
 The arm, which was broad and which was adorned with a large and beautiful bangle, which was tawny and which was of a reddish hue and which was beautiful to look at, was instantly agitated by the left arm of the king, which was also broad, which was adorned with a large and beautiful bangle, which was tawny and which was of a reddish hue and which was beautiful to look at.
 Thereupon, the one born of the union of the two, with his eyes wide open, looked at Rāma, who was standing before him.
 The trees, with their leaves, resembling the sun, the moon and the stars, and their branches resembling the clouds, stood there, their lower parts covered with the earth and their upper parts raised aloft.
 Being urged by these and other good omens, that lady of beautiful countenance, who had already been favoured by the gods, rejoiced like a seed which had been dried up by wind and heat and then revived by rain.
 Her lips were like the buds of the bimba fruit and her eyes were like the black lotus and her face shone like the moon freed from the grasp of Rahu.
 Thus freed from grief, and having her senses recovered, and her anxiety removed, and her fever gone off, her mind in a cheerful mood, that lady, having her face resembling the full moon, appeared beautiful like the night having its dark clouds dissipated.
 Then the terrible Shūrpanakhā came to the hermitage of Raghu's descendant. And the Rākşasas informed Rāma and Laksmana of her arrival.
 And seeing the mighty Rāma seated on a seat made of leaves, in the forest, with Sītā by his side and served by Lakşmaņa, they said.
 Seeing those Rākṣasas come towards him, the graceful Rāma spoke to his brother Laksmana, possessed of burning energy.
 O son of Sumitra, be you the next in the order of time after Sita. I will destroy these enemies who have come here in order to compass my destruction.
 Hearing the words of Rāma, the intelligent, Lakşmaņa, adoring Rāghava, said, "Be it so."
 And Rāghava also, the righteous-souled one, putting his mighty bow decked with golden ornaments in a state of readiness, spoke to those Raksasas, saying.
 Why do you thus treat your brothers, Rama and Laksmana, who have entered the forest of Dandaka with Sita? They are both self-controlled, leading a life of mendicancy, and observing the vow of celibacy. They are living on fruits and roots, and are dwelling in the forest of Dandaka.
 And for slaying you who are wicked and deceitful in battle, I have come here under the orders of the Rishis with my bow and arrows.
 Remain here contented, you should not leave the place. If you do not desire to leave the place, even by sacrificing your lives.
 Hearing his words, the fourteen Rākşasas, inflamed with rage, with uplifted clubs and the intention of killing the Brāhmaṇa, and with red eyes, addressed Rāma, with red eyes, in harsh words, sweet to the ear, and delighted to see him in the field.
 Having excited our anger, you shall be killed by us in battle; and this is the end of your life.
 What power have you to fight alone in the forefront of our army? How much more in battle?
 With these weapons, with your arms and with your club, with your lance and your sword, you will, O hero, be deprived of your life and energy, and your bow will be pressed by your hands.
 Having said this, the fourteen Rākşasas, with uplifted weapons and weapons and with their garments rent, rushed at Rāma.
 And they began to hurl darts at Rāma, irrepressible (as he was). And those darts and the fourteen other weapons, all discharged by those enraged heroes.
 Then with those arrows decked with gold, he severed them (the arrows). Then the highly energetic (Rāma) waxing wondrous wrath took up fourteen lances resembling the sun in effulgence. Taking up the bow and aiming at the Raksasas, Rāma discharged arrows like to Indra discharging thunderbolts.
 And piercing through the bodies of the Rākşasas with the force of their vigour, their breasts bathed in blood, they dropped down to the ground like to serpents from a heap of earth.
 With their hearts rent and their roots uprooted, they fell down on the ground like trees, bathed in blood, deformed and deprived of their spirits.
 Seeing those Rākşasas fallen on the ground, the Rākşasis were wrought up with wrath and, approaching Khara, some with dry and some with moistened mouths, began to utter cries of pain.
 Then, greatly afflicted with grief, she began to give vent to loud lamentations; and with a pale countenance she shed tears in torrents, weeping piteously.
 Seeing those Raksasas slain in battle, Surpanakha fled away from the field; and then, O Bharata, she communicated all that had happened to her sister Khara.
 Having gone to the Malaya mountain from Rșyamūka, Hanumān informed the heroic Rāghava of the two kings, Rāvana and Dasaratha.
 Here is Rāma, the highly wise and the firm of prowess, here is Rāma, the brother of Lakşmaņa, ever victorious in conflict.
 Born in the royal family of Ikşvāku, Rāma, the son of Dasaratha, is well versed in the precepts of virtue; and is capable of carrying out the orders of his father.
 With the Rajasuya and Ashvamedha sacrifices, with the fire that was offered oblations, with the kine that were given away as presents, with the earth that was protected by his ascetic penances and truthful speech, Rāma, the son of the king of Ayodhyā, has come to the forest for the sake of his wife.
 While living in the forest, bound by his promise, the high-souled Rāma had his spouse carried off by Rāvana; and he now has come to you for shelter.
 Let these brothers, Rāma and Laksmana, who are devoted to you, and who are worthy of being worshipped, be adored by you, taking them in your embrace.
 Hearing Hanumān's words, that lord of monkeys, Sugrīva, the most beautiful of beings, waxing exceeding delighted, spoke to Rāghava, saying, You are righteous and selfcontrolled and have a soul that is ever devoted to every body; and (so I have learned) you have all the virtues of the Wind-god.
 O lord, you have done me this favour and gained a great advantage by this friendship with the monkeys and myself.
 If you have any friendship for me, stretch out your arm, and take this arm of mine. And if you have any sense of honour, let this arm be cut off.
 Hearing the kind words of Sugrīva, Hanumān, with a delighted heart, took his hand and began to press it. And delighted, he embraced him, who was thus being pressed, in token of friendship.
 Then abandoning his mendicant form, that chastiser of foes, Hanumān, created a fire by rubbing together two dry pieces of wood.
 Having worshipped the fire that was burning and being honoured by the flowers offered to him, they both sat down, with a cheerful heart, with rapt attention. Thereupon, they went round the fire that was blazing and then they declared themselves to be of the same age.
 Thereupon the monkey and Rāma, having their minds cheered, looked at one another and were not satisfied.
 Sugrīva said to Rāghava: “You are my comrade and dear to me. We have both been afflicted with grief and have enjoyed happiness.
 Thereupon breaking a branch of the Sala tree covered with flowers, Sugrīva along with Rāma, sat on its top.
 And Hanumān, the son of the Wind-god, with a delighted heart, presented to Laksmana a branch of a sandal tree, furnished with excellent blossoms.
 Thereupon Sugriva, with eyes expanded with joy, answered Rāma with sweet and melodious words, saying.
 I have been rendered miserable by Rāma and therefore am wandering in fear, having been deprived of my wife in the forest and finding no way out of my peril.
 I am afraid and am living in the forest in a state of stupefaction. I have been deceived by my brother Vāli and have become an enemy of him, O Rāghava.
 O you of mighty prowess, do you remove the fear of Vali, who is highly anxious on my account, O Kākutstha, for you should do this, so that he may not have any fear.
 Thus accosted, the energetic and pious Kakutstha, delighted, answered Sugrīva, saying.
 I know the fruits of friendship, O great monkey, which are to be gained by doing good to one's friends. I shall, therefore, kill that Vāli who has carried away your wife.
 These my arrows, resembling the sun, are certainly going to fall on that vicious Vāli. And they, furnished with the feathers of the Kanka bird, resembling the thunder-bolts of Indra, sharp-pointed, straight, and with their heads like to serpents, shall, in wrath, fall on that one, resembling a mountain.
 Behold, the son of Vāli, slain with sharpened shafts resembling snakes, now lies on the earth, like to a mountain broken into fragments.
 Hearing those words fraught with his welfare, Sugriva, greatly delighted, spoke to Rāghava these words fraught with his welfare,
 O foremost of men, do you, through your favour, enable me to recover my kingdom and also my beloved wife. O best of men, do you act in such a way that my elder brother may not again kill me.
 And on account of Sugriva's love for Rāma and his devotion to Sītā, his eyes, resembling gold and gems, began to sparkle.
 When the night was over, the great ascetic Viśvāmitra, after having taken leave of the two kings, went to the mountain of Uttara.
 Having sent Viśvāmitra to Mithilā, king Daśaratha, without bidding adieu to the king of Mithilā, went back to his city.
 Then the king of Videha gave a large wealth as dowry, hundreds and thousands of kine and excellent cloths and thousands of costly blankets and garments and horses and elephants and cars and foot-soldiers and a hundred maidens, all beautiful, adorned and of excellent features and well-attired and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and servants and
 Thereat, the king, exceedingly pleased, gave that excellent princess as a present to the sage. And having bestowed upon the monarch various presents and taken his leave, that lord of Mithila entered Mithila. And the king of Ayodhyā, with his sons, those high-souled ones, proceeded towards the city, escorted by all the saints, and followed by his forces.
 As that best of men, the king Rāma, went away, the birds began to utter terrible cries all around, and the beasts of the earth also followed him in a circle.
 Seeing those birds and beasts, the king asked Vasiştha, “Why do these birds and beasts show such ill omen and why does my heart tremble?"
 Hearing these words of the king Dasaratha, the great Rishi said, 'I shall tell you what the fruits of this will be. There is a dreadful, celestial and terrible bird, which will come here and cause great fear. But the deer will drive it away. This fear will be dispelled.
 As they were talking together, the wind began to blow, shaking the whole earth and uprooting mighty trees. The sun was covered with darkness and all the directions were shrouded with dust.
 Vasishtha, the other Rishis, the king with his sons, were all asleep. And everything else in that darkness was also lifeless. And the army was also enveloped in the darkness like a mass of ashes.
 He saw that one, who resembled Bhima in his strength, who was crowned with matted locks and who was of the race of Bhrigu and of the family of Jamadagni, who was the destroyer of kings and who was incapable of being vanquished like a hill, who was irresistible like the fire of dissolution and who was incapable of being looked at by any one, who was like a flaming fire in his energy and who was difficult to be looked at by the people. He took up his sword with the string of which the sound resembled the roaring of the thunder-bolt and which resembled a snake in its movement, which was the destroyer of Tripura and which was the weapon of Shiva.
 Beholding that terrible-looking one blazing like a fire, the Vipras, headed by Vashishtha, engaged in reciting Mantras and making oblations to the sacred fire, began to speak to each other.
 Is he still desirous of avenging his father's death? Will he still destroy the Kshatriya race? Having before destroyed the Kshatriya race, he has become free from anger and grief. He does not any longer wish to destroy the Kshatriyas.
 Having said this, they took away the terrible-sighted son of Bhrigu. And the Rishis addressed Rama in sweet accents, saying, 'O Rama, O Rama.'
 Having received the adoration offered by the Rishi, the powerful Jamadagni's son, Rama, addressed Rama, the son of Dasharatha.
 When the army had encamped, Bharata, with great eagerness, went to see his brother, Satrughna, desiring him to show the way.
 The son of Kunti, saying, 'Do you speedily send Vasishtha, your mother's son,' went with haste in order to welcome his mother.
 Thereupon Sumanta, desirous of seeing Satrughna, came near the former; and, as Bharata had come near Rāma, so Satrughna came near his brother.
 And going to the hermitage Bharata saw the graceful and charming cottage of his brother, and also the excellent bed.
 Bharata saw before her the hermitage of Shala. He saw many trees cut and broken, and many flowers crushed. He saw the hermitage of Lakshmana and Rama of pure conduct. And he saw that the hermitage was marked with Kusha grass here and there.
 And he saw that in that palace were made collections of deer and buffaloes, and Karīśa, for keeping it cool.
 When that mighty armed one, Bharata, was proceeding, he spoke thus to Satrughna and all his counsellors.
 Bharadvāja said : I think that we have reached the spot which Yama had pointed out to us. I do not think that the river Mandākinī is very far off.
 Laksmana has placed the cloth on the ground with care, for he desires to show the way to one who is desirous of proceeding to the wrong place at an improper time.
 And there were heard the neighings of the fleet steeds with high hoofs, that ranged in the mountain side.
 Those ascetics, who are always desirous of attaining to Brahma in the forest, see this smoke proceeding from the dark waters of the Krishna.
 O foremost of men, O reverend one, I shall see the grateful ascetic Rāghava, even as a mighty saint (Maharși) is seen.
 And having proceeded for a while towards Citrakuta, Rāghava reached the banks of Mandākinī and addressed the people thus,
 O foremost of men, I have passed my life in the world in the midst of men. I have now come to a lonely place. Let this my life that is still in my body be taken away from me.
 For my sake, that lord of men, the highly effulgent Rāghava has renounced all his enjoyments, and is living in the forest.
 The Lord of wealth said: “It is proper that the people should worship my feet today. I shall today kill Rāma, Sītā and Lakşmaņa.
 Thus bewailing in the forest, the son of Dasaratha (Rāma), beheld a charming hermitage of leaves.
 There, Bharata saw a broad and well-trodden sacrificial ground, covered with numerous Sala, Tala, Asva, and Karuna leaves. It was studded with golden bows, arrows, and swords, and it was adorned with golden, large, and excellent shields. It was filled with arrows and darts, having the splendour of the sun or the moon. It was like a kitchen, full of blazing fire. It was covered with the ground of silver, adorned with white cloth, and decked with golden strings. It was like a palace of the enemies, filled with the beautiful deer, and adorned with various kinds of ornaments and jewels. It was like a den of lion, filled with many lions. It was like the kitchen, full of fire. It was like a sacrificial ground, covered with water.
 Then having cast his eyes on the earth for a moment, Bharata saw his preceptor seated in a hermitage on a lotus leaf, his matted locks matted, clad in a dark deer-skin, and wearing a tawny robe, resembling a flame in appearance, having a lion for his neck, and mighty arms, having eyes resembling blue lotuses, and resembling the lord of the earth having an ocean for his boundary, and wearing a tawny deerskin, and living in the dress of a hermit, and seated like Brahma eternal, and attended by Sita and Lakshmana.
 Beholding him, the graceful Bharata, the son of the Kekaya king, of virtuous soul, being overwhelmed with grief and stupefaction, rushed towards him.
 Seeing them thus, she began to lament in grief, saying, 'Oh, how can I, who am thus afflicted, prevent you from going to the forest?'
 This elder brother of mine, having been brought up in the forest by the wild animals, was accustomed to be waited upon in the assembly by the natural creatures.
 It is proper for the high-souled one to live in a comfortable abode. He, however, lives here, clad in deer-skin, for observing virtue.
 Why does Rāma, who used to bear a heavy burden of the various thoughts of his mind, now bear this load of hair?
 That person, who, being possessed of a body, has not performed the religious rites which should be performed by every one, has to go through the consequences of such acts in his next birth.
 This noble person, whose body has been massaged with sandal, how is it possible that his body should be besmeared with dirt?
 This misfortune is not the result of Rāma's conduct; he is entitled to happiness. Fie on my life, which is full of cruelty and which is an object of reproach with the world!
 Thus lamenting in grief with his face turned away and his lotuslike hands placed on his knees, Bharata, shedding tears, fell at the feet of Rāma.
 Being aggrieved by that, the highly powerful prince Bharata, having addressed him as "Your Majesty," once more asked him (for the favour of the kingdom).
 And with his throat choked with tears, seeing that illustrious one, he could not proceed further, and saying "O reverend one," began to weep.
 And Satrughna also, weeping, worshipped Rama's feet. And embracing both, Rama also wept. Then those two princes with Sumanta and Guha went to the forest. And the Sun and Moon shone in the sky as the Moon and the Star do in the presence of Brahma and Brihaspati.
 And seeing those kings, who were like to elephants, assembled in that great forest, all the monkeys, with delight, uttered shrill cries.
 Defeating the Lord of wealth and the brother of the lord of Raksasas, the mighty army of Mahasena set out for Saravana.
 And Dasagrīva beheld that large shaft, furnished with golden wings and looking like the second sun, lying on the mountain. And climbing up the mountain, he saw Pușpaka, and it was stationed there, with its flagstaff retracted.
 Why is it that this car has been stopped? Whence has this car been brought? Why did it come to me? How is it that the lord of the Rākşasas, surrounded by his ministers, did not think of the reason of this? Why did it not come at my desire? Is it the work of any mountain? Then the intelligent Marīca said: “This car of Pushpaka does not come at the behest of any person. Or it may be that Pushpaka is the vehicle of Kubera. Therefore, it has been stopped.
 As he was speaking thus, there appeared near him a dark-complexioned and fierce-looking Raksasa, named Vama, who was dwarfish, black, and had a matted head. Nandishvara, the charioteer of Bhava, thus spoke to the chief of the Raksasas, who was alarmed.
 O Ten-necked one, leave this mountain; here is Shiva at play. This mountain has been made by all the gods, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Rakshasas, Suparnas, Nagas and all the other beings, and therefore is incapable of being penetrated by any one.
 Hearing Nandi's words, Indra, whose earrings began to tremble with anger, left Pushpaka and descending on the ground, exclaimed, “Who is this Shanka?" And coming to the foot of a hill, he saw the god there in his own form, standing near him. And taking up another dart, blazing like a second Shanka,
 Seeing that monkey-chief, that Raksasa, disregarding the monkeys, smiling, poured forth water like the clouds.
 Then the enraged Anjana, the other part of the body of Sankara, thus spoke to the Raksasa Daśānana, who stood there.
 O Ten-necked one, because you did ridicule me who was in the form of a monkey, resembling a thunderbolt, and who was equal in prowess and energy to your monkey-soldiers, therefore shall your monkey-soldiers rise up for slaying you.
 Those fierce and terrible ones, having nails, teeth and weapons for their minds, having their blood for their garments, possessed of great strength, intoxicated with battle, rushing hither and thither, like so many mountains, will destroy your insolence, your arrogance and your various other sorts of pride, along with your ministers and relatives.
 What can I do now, O night-ranger, that is worthy of being done by me to you? You are already slain by your own acts, you cannot be slain by me.
 When the great god had thus spoken, the celestial drums began to sound, and flowers began to drop down from the sky.
 Without reflecting a moment, that one of mighty strength, approaching the mountain, said these words to the ten-necked one.
 O lord of cattle, the car of Pushpaka has been destroyed on my account. I am doing this for you, O you that are lord of all creatures, that is, I am making this hill to be the root of the mountain of the celestials.
 How does he sport so continually with the king? And how does he not perceive the impending danger that is before him?
 Saying this, Rāma, stretching out his arms, quickly weighed the mountain and it began to tremble.
 O king, the celestials were trembling at the very thought of Indra's return; and the mountain, the abode of Maheshvara, began to shake.
 Thereupon Mahādava, the foremost of the celestials, the sportive monkey, Rama, pressed with his toe the mountain.
 On their master being thus wounded, the arms of the Raksasa, that looked like hills and trees, became stricken with amazement.
 And on account of the hostility of the Rakshasa and the pain caused by his grasp, Virava suddenly broke forth, shaking the three worlds.
 The celestials, headed by Indra, and the Yakshas, the Vidyadharas and the Siddhas, all, on that occasion, exclaimed, “What is this?” The oceans were agitated, the mountains were shaken, and the entire universe was moved.
 Do you propitiate Mahadeva, that lord of Uma, having a blue throat; for, O Ten-necked one, we see no other refuge here.
 Bowing to him and uttering his praise and adoring him, seek his shelter, and Kālaņa will be pleased with you, and grant you his grace.
 Having been thus addressed by his ministers, the Ten-necked one honoured the lord of bulls, and praised him with many benedictions and hymns. The Rakshasa had been weeping for one thousand years.
 Then the powerful Mahadeva, finding the king installed on the throne of the mountain, became pleased with him and having taken him by the hand, said to the Ten-necked one.
 O Rākşasa, I am highly pleased with your valour. And you have been freed from the fearful ocean, by the assistance of the mount, (Meru), which is the foremost of the mountains. And as this whole universe has been frightened by your arrival, therefore, you shall be known by the name of Ravana.
 The celestials, the human beings, the Yakshas, and all other creatures in the world shall thus tell you about Ravana, the king of Raksasas.
 Go, Paulastya, with confidence, the way you wish to go; I grant you permission, O lord of the Raksasas, to go there.
 Thus accosted by Shambhu, Lankeshvara said, “O Mahadeva, if you are pleased, grant me the boon I ask for."
 I have acquired immunity from the gods, Gandharvas, Danavas, Rakshasas, Guhyakas, and other powerful beings.
 O deity of the triple city, you have attained the Brahma state and your life has been prolonged. Grant me now the remainder of my life and give me my weapons.
 Thus addressed by Ravana, Shankara gave him a sword blazing like the moon, called Chandrahāsa, and also gave him the boon that his life would not be lost.
 Shambhu said: O Vajrin, I will tell you what is good for you. If you ignore me, you will surely be destroyed by me.
 Thus having been thus addressed by Maheshvara, Ravana, having his name changed, saluted Mahadeva and ascended Puspaka.
 Then Rāvana began to range the earth, harassing and killing the highly powerful Kșatriya chiefs. And some of the heroic and powerful Kșatriya warriors, incapable of being vanquished in battle, being thus slain, gave up their lives with all their possessions.
 Other men, endued with wisdom, knowing the invincibility of the Rakshasa, said to the proud and powerful Ravana, “You have been defeated".
 Encouraged by Rāma's words, those swift couriers, with a sweet voice, set out with speed; and did not delay their way.
 Thereupon after having arrived at Mathura in the space of three days, they told everything to Satrughna as it was.
 The renunciation of Lakşmaņa, Rāma's vow, the installation of his sons, and the following of the citizens. In the lap of the Vindhya mountains, Rāma made a charming city, which he named Kuśa, after the name of the river.
 And the city of Lava, Sravasti, and Ayodhyā, were all rendered desolate. And the mighty car-warriors Rāghava and Bharata, having made preparations for ascending to heaven,
 Having thus informed the high-souled Satrughna of all that had taken place, the ambassadors said to him, “Wait a little and the king will come." Hearing of that dreadful calamity, which was about to overtake his race, the son of Raghu summoned all his counsellors and the chief priest, and then related to them everything as it had really taken place.
 The king then, in company with his brothers, made the following speech to himself. "My time will come when I will be turned upside down by my brothers." Having said this, that hero then installed his two sons as kings.
 Subahu received Mathura and the other quarter of the earth, and then dividing the army in twain, the king of Madhu placed the wealth in the two divisions, and then went on to Ayodhya, having sent Subahu and Madhuri with the king of the Videhas to Ayodhya, on one chariot.
 And he saw the high-souled Rāma, blazing like to a flame, with a shirt of fine cloth, in company with those unceasing ascetics, and bowing down to Rāma, he with controlled senses, said to that righteous one, dwelling upon morality,
 Having performed the sacred rites for the two sons, O descendant of Raghu, do you, O king, accompany me, resolved as I am to slay the Raksasa. I wish to slay this one in especial. Knowing his intention, Rama, the descendant of Raghu, said to Satrughna, “So be it."
 After his words had been uttered, the monkeys and bears, lions and bears, came in thousands.
 Having placed Sugriva at their head and desirous of seeing Rāma, who was proceeding to heaven, all the celestials sons, saints' sons, Gandharvas' daughters,
 And knowing that Rāma had been slain, they all came there, O king, having come to pay you their homage. If, O you resembling a person, Rāma had not been killed by us, we should all have been killed by you, who were raising your mace like the rod of Yama. Then that powerful Sugrīva, having saluted that hero, was ready to send the news (to the monkeys), O king, saying, 'I have come, O lord of men, having installed the heroic Angada, and, O king, having determined to follow you.
 Being thus addressed, Kākutstha smiled and said, “Yes, I shall do what you say." And the highly famous Vibhīşaņa addressed the lord of Rākşasas, saying, So long as your subjects shall live, O mighty Rākşasa, you shall live in your own dominions in Lankā. So long as the Moon and the Sun shall remain in the firmament, and so long as my words shall be accepted in the world, so long shall you hold your sway.
 Do you rule your subjects like a friend, and do you obey my commands. You should protect the subjects according to the scriptures; you should not utter any thing further. O highly powerful Raksasa chief, I desire to know what else you wish to say. Do you adore that deity of the Ikşvāku dynasty, who is the protector of the world. Even the very celestials, with Indra at their head, do not cease to adore that deity. Then Vibhīşaņa, the lord of the Rākşasas, promised to the words of Rāma, remembering the command of the lord of the Rākşasas.
 Having said this, Kākutstha spoke to Hanumān, 'You have become cognizant of the object of life; therefore, do not make your vow fruitless. As long as my words will be repeated in the world, O lord of monkeys, so long will I remain on the Earth, obeying your commands.' Thus accosted by the high-souled Rāma, Hanumān was greatly pleased; and he answered, 'O exalted one, I shall remain on the Earth, as long as the benedictory tale shall be repeated.
 As long as you are not yet come of age, you shall always live. Having thus addressed the old Brahmana son of Brahma, Jambavan with Mainda and Dvivida and the five brothers of Jambavan.
 Having said this to the monkeys and the birds, the descendant of Kākutstha said, “Come, let us set out, as I have said."
 Having ascertained that the ascetic was ready for receiving guests, the son of the Kekaya king addressed Bharata, saying, "Let us offer him hospitality."
 Bharata said : O you of auspicious marks, you have performed the duty of a guest to me by giving me water to wash my feet and by entertaining me in the forest.
 Then Bharadvāja smilingly said to Bharata, I know you to be a man who is always pleased with others; you are always satisfied with them.
 O best of men, I desire that you yourself should make the food for your troops, for your kindness to me, even as your desire is for the welfare of your subjects.
 Why have you brought the forces here? Why did you not go away with them, O foremost of men?
 Bharata with joined hands said to that ascetic, 'O exalted one, I have not fled from the battle-field, fearing the enemy's prowess.
 O worshipful one, kings, as also princes, should always try to protect ascetics who are living in forests.
 And elephants, horses, men, maddened with rage and fierce beasts, following me, cover the earth, O exalted one.
 For the sake of the welfare of all creatures, I alone came here. I do not destroy trees, water, land, or hermitages or even grass.
 And the prime saint said to the troops, 'Come!' And thus commanded, Bharata sent out his troops.
 Having entered the hall of fire, he drank water and washed his mouth, and then called Vishvavarma to attend upon him as a guest.
 I call you Vishvakarma and the son of Tvashtri. I desire to entertain you as a guest. Do you make the necessary arrangements.
 The gods, headed by Shakra, the Lokapalas and the Gandharvas and the Apsaras, all came there at the command of Indra.
 Let the rivers Praksrotasa and Tiraksa Srota, as also all the rivers which flow on the surface of the earth and in the heavens, today unite with each other.
 Let other rivers flow milk, let others flow clarified butter, and let others flow cool water, like to honey.
 He then began to call to the celestials and the Gandharvas, to the Vishvavasu and the Pishachas and the Apsaras and to all the gods and the Gandharvas.
 And Vishvachi, and Mishrakeshi, and Alambusha, and Nagadatta, and Hemavati, and Soma, and Atri's daughter Sthalini.
 And let all the Asikni and Bhamini women who are in the service of Shakra and Brahman, and all others, be invited, with all their robes, by Tumburu.
 That sacred forest, which is full of beautiful ornaments and dresses and which has beautiful fruits and flowers, is here in the Kaubera mountains.
 Here the illustrious Soma causes the preparation of excellent food, of various kinds of dishes, of all sorts of eatables, and of various kinds of sweetmeats, of garlands, of fruits and fruits of trees, of drinks, of various sorts of meat.
 Having thus concentrated his mind with a matchless energy, the ascetic of excellent vows and excellent habits, addressed the Rishi with the words of the Vedas.
 When he, with folded hands, was thus meditating, the gods came there one after another.
 The wind began to blow gently with a cool breeze, and the Malaya and the Dardura trees began to shower their fruits and leaves.
 Then the clouds poured showers of celestials flowers. And the sound of the celestial drums was heard in all the points of the compass.
 And the excellent winds began to blow, and the Apsaras began to dance. And the celestials and Gandharvas began to utter their voices; and the stringed instruments began to give forth their sounds.
 That sound, being soft and of various sorts, entered the sky, the earth and the ears of the creatures.
 When that auspicious and delightful sound of the celestial music reached every body, Bhimasena beheld the well-planned array of the Pandava army, as planned by Vishvakarma.
 The ground around was level and spread for a distance of five yojanas, covered with thick and numerous groves of trees, that looked like dark sapphires.
 In that forest grew Bileva, Kapitha, Panasa, fruits and seeds, Amala and Chuta.
 The mild river then came to those Kurus and the Uttaras, who had been living in the forest, enjoying all the luxuries of life.
 And four white pavilions for the elephants and horses, and many a white gate with palaces and towers; and the king's palace resembling the white clouds, and furnished with a gate, and with a hall made of white ivory, and perfumed with excellent perfumes; and spacious, and having beds and seats and ways for walking; and furnished with excellent viands and drinks, and dishes, and robes, and all other articles of use, and furnished with clean and polished vessels; and furnished with excellent seats, and a good bed,
 And entering that mansion, Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, and the ministers with the priest, were highly delighted to see that palace filled with jewels and precious stones.
 Then Bharata, with his counsellors, began to act like a king by taking his royal seat, umbrella and fan.
 Having bowed to Rama, he began to worship the seat on which he sat, and having taken a fan, he sat down on his own seat.
 Then the ministers and priests sat down, one after the other, and then the commander and the king's generalissimo.
 And at Bharadvaja's command, the rivers carrying with them the milk, began to approach Bharata.
 There are excellent and charming houses, built of bricks and plastered with mortar and painted with blue colour.
 In that moment there came to the palace twenty thousand Brahmana women, adorned with celestial ornaments.
 Twenty thousand women, wearing ear-rings and gems and pearls and looking like a mass of flowers, have been sent by Kubera himself.
 Twenty thousand Apsaras followed behind Rāma from Nandana; and Narada, Tumbaru, and Gopāścā, resembling the sun in splendour, and the other kings of the Gandharvas, performed before Bharata.
 At the command of Bharadvaja's son, Alambusha, Mishrakeshi, Pundarika and Vamana, assuming the forms of women, began to wait upon Bharata.
 All the garlands which were in the celestial garden of Aittraratha, and all which were seen in Prayaga, appeared in the effulgence of Bharadvaja.
 The Bilva, the Mardangika, the Asana, the Shamyagrah, the Vibhita and the Ashvatha, all came into existence from the energy of Bharadvaja.
 Then those that were slender and thin, those that were small and those that were short, those that were round and those that were thick, all came to Krishna.
 The hermits of Bharadvāja's hermitage, having assumed the shapes of young women, sat there in the forest, sporting with the young women of the following species, viz., Shinshapāla, Malakī, Jambū, Añyas, Malati, Mallikā and Yashā.
 The persons addicted to the use of wine, drink wine and curds when they are hungry. They eat all sorts of meat that they wish to eat.
 There are seven and eight young women who bathe and wash on the banks of the river. They are in love with one man.
 And those ladies of beautiful eyes and beautiful person, having bathed, appeared. And those ladies of beautiful eyes and beautiful person, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bathed, appeared. And those excellent women, having bath
 Then those warriors of great strength, having taken away the steeds and elephants and horses and the sons of Surabhi, duly gave them the proper food.
 The highly powerful warriors of the Ikshvaku race, urging on their horses, began to feed on various kinds of sweetmeats.
 Horses, without their reins, ran towards their masters. Elephants without their drivers began to run about, maddened with wine.
 The soldiers, being entertained with all kinds of pleasures, and anointed with sandal-paste, and joined by the Apsaras, began to sing.
 Nor shall we go to Ayodhyā nor to Dandaka. Let Bharata be happy, let Rāma be happy.
 The infantry and the cavalry, the horsemen and the elephant riders, having learnt this method of warfare, thus spoke to the helpless (king).
 And thousands of delighted warriors began to sing, saying, This is indeed heaven. And the soldiers, with wreaths on, began to dance and laugh and sing. And thousands of them began to walk round (the assembly-hall).
 Having partaken of that food resembling nectar, they saw various celestial foods and they were highly delighted to eat them.
 All your servants, retainers, wives and soldiers were highly delighted and were all clad in new dresses.
 The elephants, the birds, the sheep, the horses, the deer, and the birds, were all there in great joy, for there was none that was not pleased with the ceremony.
 There was no man there who was not in the habit of wearing a loincloth. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man there who was not fasting. There was no man
 Thousands of men, all clad in iron armour, were struck with wonder at the sight of thousands of white cars, adorned with white pennons and having all their wheels furnished with white flags, drawn by white steeds and driven by white steeds and driven by white steeds, and having in their yokes white goats, and with their bows and quivers of the colour of white clouds, and with white shafts in their hands, and with white umbrellas and white standards, and with white cloths, and with white weapons and white armour, and white arrows, and white spears, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and white garlands, and white umbrellas, and white flags, and white palanquins, and white cars, and white vehicles, and white bows, and white quivers, and white horses, and
 In the forests were many wells full of milk and curds; and those forests were full of kine, uttering sweet sounds.
 The way was adorned with the bodies of dead animals, with bones, with flesh and marrow of animals, with the heads and beaks of vultures and cranes.
 And there were a thousand vessels, and ten thousand jars, and jars by millions, and thousand vessels made of Shatamukha.
 In a well-cultivated field, there were tanks full of milk, filled with Kumbhas, Karumbhas, Dadhi, Pura, Yauvana, Kapitha, Rasala, Dana and white Sharva, while there were heaps of sugar and honey.
 The men saw there water in the form of calcined sand, of earth, of crushed iron, and of other sorts of mineral, and also in the form of gold, silver, and copper. And in the waters of the Tirthas and the streams, they saw thousands of vessels, and various sorts of ornaments, and golden teeth, and ear-rings, and armlets, and necklaces, and pearls, and conchs, and ear-rings of silver and gold, and gems of various sorts, and umbrellas, and bows, and quivers, and beautiful swords and other weapons, and beds, and seats,
 And those foremost of men, seeing that region, saw that the herds of cattle were without any fear, that the tanks and ponds were full, that the conveyances were furnished with full loads, that the elephants, horses, and kine were fed, and that the herds of cattle were without any fear, that the tanks and ponds were full, that the conveyances were furnished with full loads, that the elephants, horses, and kine were fed, and that the fields were filled with excellent crops of barley.
 The people present there wondered at what they saw as like a dream. They saw how the great Rishi had treated the guests of Bharata.
 Thus passing the night like the celestials in the Nandana garden, the night passed away in the charming hermitage of Bharadvaja.
 The Gandharvas and the rivers then returned to their respective abodes, having taken leave of Bharadvaja, accompanied by all those beautiful damsels.
 The ground was strewn with excellent celestial ornaments, all broken by men and sprinkled with sandal paste.
 Seeing his troops discomfited, his hair bristling, his brothers slain, and those highly powerful brothers of his resembling Shakra himself, and his paternal uncles slain, (Partha) waxed wroth. Then that highly energetic one, gifted with the prowess of Brihadatta, grew exceedingly angry. And then the two best of Rakshasas, his brothers, possessed of high prowess and maddened in battle, beheld.
 Then taking his car, resembling a thousand suns, the son of Sakra, looking like the sun, rushed against the monkeys.
 Then, stretching his bow, the diadem-decked Kiriti, with his earrings adorned with bells, gave vent to loud war-cries.
 With that lion-like roar of his, with that shaking of his tail, and with the dreadful sound of his bow, he terrified the monkeys.
 Beholding the wonderful property of the body, the monkeys became very much afraid and began to seek one another's protection.
 Seeing his form like that of the three steps of Vishnu, the monkeys fled away in all directions in fear.
 And arriving at the appointed place, the monkeys, senseless, sought the shelter of their lord, Lakşmaņa's elder brother.
 Thereupon the descendant of Kākutstha, seated on his car, beheld a mighty bowman resembling a mountain, shooting his shafts from a distance, like to the clouds.
 Beholding that huge body, Rāghava, exceedingly astonished, soothing the monkeys, addressed Vibhisana, saying.
 Who is that one, resembling a mountain, holding the bow, having eyes resembling those of a cat, seated on a vast chariot yoked to a thousand horses? He shines like Maheshvara surrounded by the beings with sharp-pointed darts, spears, and arrows, and resembling the wind with his tongue of Time. He looks like the clouds with their lightning flashes surrounded by his car-shafts.
 His bow, furnished with gold, was drawn and ready for use. And it adorned that foremost of cars like the sky adorned with the discus of Shakra.
 This foremost of Rakshasas, who adorns the field of battle, comes on his car resembling the Sun in effulgence, having the standard on its front and decorated with the crescent. His ten weapons shine with the effulgence of the rays of the sun. His bow resembles the thunder-bolt of Indra.
 That mighty car-warrior was furnished with the standard, the pennons, the flags and the banners; and was also furnished with four kinds of weapons, and he roared like the clouds.
 Twenty, ten, and eight car-warriors mounted on cars and armed with fearful bows and golden and black arrows.
 There were two swords on the sides of the altar, and two lamps on its sides, and the four hands were decorated with the sacred grass.
 His voice was deep and his complexion was red; he was calm; he was like a huge mountain; he had a large and terrible countenance; he was like the sun in the midst of the clouds.
 This handsome one, with his arms having golden bracelets, looks like Himavat, that foremost of mountains, with his two summits.
 His handsome face, adorned with ear-rings, looks like the moon appearing in the clouds after the moon-set.
 O you of mighty arms, tell me who is this foremost of Raksasas, whom seeing, the monkeys, were filled with terror and fled away in all directions.
 Thus accosted by the highly energetic prince Rāma, the exceedingly energetic Vibhīşana thus replied to him.
 Rāvana was the king of Rākşasas, the son of the younger brother of Vaiśravaņa. And he was the lord of the Rākşasas; and he was of immeasurable energy, and mighty, and of a high soul; and he was the son of Daśagrīva; and he was of fearful deeds, and of a high soul; and he was the lord of Rākşasas. And his son was the heroic Ravana's self, and he was the most powerful of all. And he was a servant to the aged, and he was the repository of knowledge, and he was the foremost of all those versed in weapons.
 That son of Dhanymālini, named Atikāya, who is versed in the science of stratagem and policy, who is acquainted with the use of arms, of elephants, horses, of swords and bows, who is well versed in the science of cajolery and intimidation, and who is well acquainted with the science of gift-giving, and who, relying on his arm, is able to render Lankā free from fear, is known to be this Atikāya.
 By virtue of this asceticism, I have pleased Brahman of purified soul, and I have got all the weapons and have vanquished all my enemies.
 The self-create has granted him invulnerability to the celestials and the Asuras and this is his celestial armour and car, effulgent like the sun.
 By virtue of this weapon, I have vanquished hundreds of celestials and Danavas, and protected all my possessions, and killed Yakshas.
 In battle, he had checked the thunderbolt of Indra, and the noose of the lord of the waters.
 Here is that foremost of Raksasas, that son of Ravana, that learned and powerful one, that destroyer of the pride of the celestials and Asuras.
 O best of men, exert yourself, quickly do what I say. The monkey-army is already being destroyed by my shafts.
 Thereupon the powerful Atikaya entering the monkey-army began to stretch his bow and gave forth his war-cry.
 Seeing that foremost of car-warriors, that one of dreadful appearance, seated on his car, those high-souled and foremost of the forest dwellers, Kumuda, Dvivida, Mainda, Nila, Sharabha and others, rushed towards him all at once, with trees and crags.
 The exceedingly powerful and the best of all persons learned in weapons, Atikāya, cut down with his arrows set with gold, the trees and the mountains of those men.
 Then that one of terrible body and well-skilled in war, began to pierce them all with his arrows of iron heads.
 Thus assailed with the arrows they lost their limbs and were vanquished. They could not stand against the son of Atiratha in that great battle.
 The Rākşasa, waxing wroth, began to terrify the army of the heroic monkeys, like to a tiger in the pride of his youth, in the guise of a deer.
 And that lord of the Raksasas, drawing his bow, suddenly brought it down on Rāma, that hero of the monkey-army, who was not engaged in fight. Thereat, coming out of the crowd, that bowman, addressing Rama, said.
 He, who has the power and who is willing to fight, should fight with me. I do not fight with any one who is not a man. Let him, who has the power and who is willing to fight, grant me a battle.
 Hearing those words of Rāma and being filled with rage, Sumitrā's son, the slayer of foes, with his countenance aglow, taking up his bow, rose up and said.
 Thereat, Saumitri, waxing wroth, drawing his bow-string, shot an arrow at Atikaya's head, which, piercing through, cut off the latter's mighty bow.
 And filling the whole earth and the sky and the ocean and the points of the horizon, the twang of Laksmana's bow frightened all the denizens of the night.
 Hearing the terrible twang of the bow of Sumitra's son, the highly powerful and energetic son of the lord of the Rakshasas was greatly amazed.
 Seeing Lakşmaņa rise up, the huge-armed Atikāya, wrought up with wrath, taking a sharpened shaft, said.
 O Saumitri, you are a child and ignorant of the strength of your arms; go where there is a season like to the night and desire to fight with me.
 The mountains cannot bear the weight of my arrows shot from my bow. The sky and the earth also cannot bear that force.
 You wish to wake the fire of death, which is now fast asleep, but you will not return to your own abode. I shall deprive you of your life.
 Or, you are resolved to stand your ground, not willing to retreat? Stand then, abandoning your life, you shall go to the abode of Yama.
 Behold my whetted shafts, which are capable of destroying foes and which are like the weapons of the lord of creatures and which are furnished with golden ornaments.
 This arrow, resembling a serpent, will drink your blood like a enraged king of the forest drinking the blood of the king of snakes. Having said these words, the king, in anger, placed the arrow on his bow.
 Hearing the words of the Atikaya, the son of Sagara, angry and proud, the intelligent and powerful king, said these words in anger to Brihadaśri.
 Your prowess does not consist in mere words. Nor is the man who is proud of his words, ever respected by men. O wicked-souled one, when I stand here with my bow in my hand, do you display your strength before me.
 By action a person may show his energy and by energy he may show his manliness. A man who is endued with manliness is said to be a hero.
 Armed with various weapons, you are armed with a bow, mounted on a chariot. Show your prowess with arrows or weapons.
 Then shall I bring down your head with sharp arrows, like to the wind carrying away a ripe mango from the top of the tree.
 Today your body will be pierced with arrows furnished with golden wings and furnished with arrows furnished with golden wings and the blood flowing from the wounds caused by those arrows.
 Knowing him to be a boy, you should not disregard him. Whether he be a boy or an old man, you should know that death will overtake him in battle.
 The three worlds were once destroyed by Vişņu, when he had assumed the three forms of his three paces. Hearing the words of Laksmana, who spoke for the good of all, Atikaya became greatly enraged, and took up a deadly shaft. And thereat the celestials, the Daityas, the Maharşis, the great Guhyakas, and the Vidyadharas, beheld that conflict.
 Thereupon, the huge-bodied Atikaya, waxing wroth, taking up a bow and arrow, discharged the latter at Laksmana, as if tearing asunder the sky.
 And that sharpened shaft resembling a serpent, Lakşmaņa, that slayer of hostile heroes, cut off with half-moon, as it came towards him.
 Beholding that shaft thus cut, that snake of a man resembling one that has tasted the fruits of life, waxed exceedingly wroth, and discharged five shafts at Atikaya. But the night-ranger's brother, the younger brother of Bharata, with arrows that had not yet been drawn from the bow, cut those shafts of his.
 Having cut off all those shafts with his sharp arrows, Lakşmaņa, the slayer of hostile heroes, took up a sharpened shaft, blazing like to fire in effulgence.
 Taking up that excellent bow, Laksmana set it on his back and drew it with great force and discharged an arrow.
 Then that powerful one pierced the foremost of the Rākşasas with a shaft discharged from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, and that arrow cut off the latter's head.
 And that arrow sunk in the forehead of the Rakshasa Bhima, looked like a snake in a mountain, dyed in blood.
 And the powerful Raksasa, afflicted with the shafts of Lakşmaņa, began to tremble like to the dreadful gate of Tripura, shattered by Rudra's shafts. And that mighty one, sighing, and reflecting, said to himself:-"This my foe is worthy of praise, as he has borne my shafts."
 Having thus disposed of the elephant, broken off his tusks and dislocated his mighty arms, he got up on the car and proceeded on his way.
 That foremost of Rākşasas took seven hundred and three shafts; and set them on his bow and drew them and discharged them.
 The arrows resembling the sun and resembling the rays of the sun, discharged from the bows of the chief of the Rakshasas, with golden feathers, looked like so many shafts of fire in the sky.
 Then that younger brother of the descendant of Raghu, with a calm mind, began to cut off into small pieces with his sharp arrows the arrows shot by the Rakshasas.
 Then seeing his shafts cut off by Rāvana's son in battle, the lord of the celestials, waxing wroth, took up a sharpened shaft.
 Then that highly effulgent one, placing that arrow on the string, discharged it, and that arrow, coming in contact with Lakshmana, pierced him between the breasts.
 Then Sumitra's son wounded in battle on his breast by Atikāya, began to shed blood like a maddened elephant.
 The lord of the universe (Indra) suddenly made his body invulnerable and then took up a very sharp arrow with his weapon.
 He then fixed on that bow a shaft furnished with a blazing golden head. That shaft then blazed forth, and also his bow.
 Having taken the iron bow called Raudramala, which was very large and very powerful, he made an arrow with a golden wing.
 Thereupon, the heroic Laksmana, having his eyes dilated, discharged at Atikāya a dreadful shaft, burning like the rod of Death himself.
 Seeing that arrow furnished with the Agneya weapon, that night-ranger discharged at that weapon a fearful shaft, shot from the bow drawn back to the ear.
 Those two best of arrows, having touched one another, began to burn with their energy, like two angry serpents of burning tail. Burning one another with their energy, they fell on the ground. They, having been reduced to ashes, lost their lustre. They, having become of the nature of a flame, did not shine on the ground.
 Thereupon the fierce Atikaya, worked up with wrath, let fly an Asra weapon. But the powerful Sumitra's son cut it off with the energy of the Indra weapon.
 Beholding Aishika slain, the son of Ravana, wrought up with rage, took up a shaft, sharpened on the stone of the Yama's bow. And that night-ranger shot that shaft at Lakshmana. But Lakshmana cut it down with the wind-shaft.
 Thereupon the enraged Lakshmana, having the appearance of a cloud, showered on the son of Ravana, arrows, like showers of rain.
 And those arrows, furnished with wings, fell suddenly to the ground, being broken by the force of the armour that was covered with the lustre of the thunder-bolt.
 Then beholding those weapons, futile, that Lakşmaņa, ever famous in battle, that slayer of hostile heroes, showered with a thousand shafts.
 That highly powerful Rakshasa, wearing mail, being thus assailed with shafts, did not at all feel any pain in that battle. That best of men could not wound him in battle.
 Thereupon coming to him, the Wind-god said, "This one is incapable of being slain and he is clad in an impenetrable mail; yet he is capable of being killed by the Brahma weapon; and he is not to be slain by any other weapon. This one is capable of being slain by the weapons of other persons, but not by his own."
 Thereupon, hearing the words of the Wind-god, Sumitra's son endowed with the energy of Indra, taking up a shaft of terrific impetus, quickly discharged the Brahma weapon.
 When Sumitra's son had taken up the bow and sharpened the arrows, the directions, the sun, the moon and the stars, and the sky, all became red with blood.
 Then, having fixed an arrow on his bow, the son of Sumitra, resembling the messenger of Yama, hurled at the son of the Sun-god an arrow resembling the thunder-bolt.
 Then the excellent and powerful Atikaya saw in battle the shaft discharged by Lakşmaņa, having the force of a thunderbolt and capable of penetrating every thing, approaching him with the speed of the wind.
 Beholding him, Satatikāya, with his sharpened arrows, pierced him and then he went on his way, accompanied by the Rākşasa.
 Seeing that one come (to fight), the Atikāyas pierced him with shafts, flaming like the fire at the time of the universal destruction. And then they smote him with darts, maces, and bludgeons, and with their lances. And deprived of his sense by those weapons, he fell down.
 Having made those weapons, which were all wonderful to handle and which were all fruitless, that shaft, which was blazing like fire, taking up the crown on the head of that one, who was larger than the Atikaya, carried it away.
 Thereupon the head of Rāma along with his head-gear and shield, being crushed by Laksmana, fell down to the earth like to a conch of the snowy Himavat.
 Seeing him lying on the ground, his clothes and ornaments scattered, the night-rangers were greatly afflicted.
 With their countenances pale, they began to lament in low voices, sighing heavily and with their throats parched with fatigue.
 Thereupon the night-rangers, who had no leader, fearfully and anxiously went round the city, (shouting) “The general is dead."
 And in consequence of the victory of the terrible and mighty Lakşmaņa, the monkeys, with faces resembling lotuses, were highly delighted. And on the destruction of the powerful enemy, the monkeys, saluted Lakşmaņa, as if he were their portion of the good.
 The monkey, looking at Lankā, and finding his desire fulfilled, and his heart swelling with the energy of success, began to reflect on what remained to be done.
 What should I now do, for their miseries are still to increase?
 The Rākşasas have been slain and the forest destroyed. But the destruction of the fort still remains to be done.
 And after the destruction of the enemy's fort, I shall obtain great happiness and success; and the labour that I shall put in this work, shall not be lost.
 Since this fire-god is burning on my finger, it behoves all of you to perform his oblations in these excellent houses.
 Thereupon that mighty monkey, with his person flaming and his hands resembling lightning, began to range the terraces of Lankā, furnished with an effulgence.
 And that monkey, looking at the houses of the Rākşasas and their gardens, and walking about the palaces, became neither agitated nor afraid.
 And springing up with great force, he threw the fire into the residence of Prahasta. And breathing like a snake, that one of great strength, entered another dwelling of Mahāpārśva. And Hanumān cast on the fire a flame resembling the fire of the Yuga.
 And that highly powerful monkey leaped upon the cars of Vajradansta and Suka and the intelligent Sarana.
 And Indrajit, the lord of monkeys, set fire to the palace of Jambumāla and that of Sumāla. And he also set fire to the palace of Rākşasa Rasiketa and that of Suryaśatru, and that of Hrasvakarna, and Dastra and Rōmaśa and the palace of Yudhōnmati, and that of the Rakşasa Dvajagriva, and the dreadful palace of Vidyujihva and that of Hastimuka, and that of Karāla, and that of Viśāla, and that of Sālitākṣa, and that of Kumbhakarna, and that of Makarākşa, and that of Naranataka, and that of Kumbara, and that of Nikumba, and that of the wicked-souled Nikaumbha, and that of Yajñaśatru, and that of Brahmaśatru.
 Having passed through many a place, the highly powerful monkey-leader, passing on to Vibhisana's mansion, began to consume it bit by bit.
 That best of monkeys, Kinkara, spread prosperity in the palatial mansions of the aged.
 And having passed all the sentinels of the powerful Rākşasa, he, gifted with the grace of fortune, entered into the palace of Rāvana.
 And that heroic monkey, Hanumān, staying at the head of the fire, blazing like to the ocean, resembling the mountain Meru, graced with various ornaments and furnished with various auspices, emitted cries, like to those of the clouds at the time of the dissolution.
 The highly powerful Rāma, as he breathed hard, blazed up like the Fire at the end of a Yuga, and he began to swell up like to a flame.
 The wind, as he roved about the buildings, burning up the flames of the sacrificial fires, and blazing up the golden net-work of the buildings, and the golden, and the jewels and the costly buildings, and the buildings having golden pillars, were all shattered to pieces. And the buildings, with their golden pillars and gems and other ornaments, fell down upon the earth.
 As the dwellings of the Siddhas are destroyed by the rain of the clouds, so the Rākşasas, flying away in all directions, were filled with fear and the sounds of their wails and shrieks were heard. Their hopes were dashed to the ground and their beauty was gone. And the monkeys, resembling the Fire-god, had come, they cried, 'Alas, alas.' And the women, crying aloud, suddenly fell down with their breasts and hips.
 Some with hair disheveled by the fire, with their limbs burnt, and with their heads shorn of hair, fall down from the fire like birds falling down from the sky.
 He saw in that palace many things made of gold, silver, iron, steel, various jewels, and other metals, and many kinds of vessels made of ivory.
 The fire is never satiated with wood and grass; even so Hanumān is never satiated with the destruction of the lords of the Rākşasas. The earth is not satiated with the Raksasa who are enemies of Hanuman.
 As Tripura had been consumed by Rudra, so was Lankā consumed by that high-souled and powerful monkey, Hanumān.
 Thereupon the fierce fire, issuing out of the summit of Lankā, flaring up, was extinguished by Hanumān, with the help of his wind-god, after he had opened its head.
 Then the fire which is the destroyer of the world, resembling a Yuga at its end, and having the wind for its fuel, and burning up all things, and spreading its flames all around, and having the rays of the sun for its smoke, and having its body for its abode, and having the Sun for its royal umbrella, and having the stars for its ornaments, and having the Moon for its splendour, and having the planets for its flames, and having the constellations for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames, and having the Moon for its flames
 And, surrounding the whole city of Lankā, like to the sun or the moon, the highly effulgent monkey, resembling a mighty fire, appeared like a burning brand.
 The sun, after rising from the ocean, appeared in the firmament, and became very bright. His rays looked like a mass of smoke. The clouds were blue and looked like lotus-petals.
 Do you not know that the lord of the three worlds, Mahendra, or Sakra, or Yama, or Varuna, or Vayu, or the dreadful Agni, or the Sun, or Kubera, or the Moon, did not come here in the shape of a monkey? It is not the Time which came here in the form of a monkey. It is not the four-faced Brahman, the creator of the universe, nor the four-faced Vishnu, the lord of the universe. It is not the lord of the Rakshasas, nor the lord of the celestials. It is not the lord of the Pitris. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra. It is not the lord of the universe. It is not the four-faced Mahendra
 Thereupon suddenly Lankā, with her Rakşasas, and horses and cars, and birds and animals and birds and trees, all, plunged into the fire, with loud lamentations.
 O child, O son, O lover, O friend, O life, you have been slain, a precious jewel. The Rakshasas, who were thus speaking, produced a loud and dreadful sound.
 And that city, surrounded by the army, that had been filled with heroes, was enveloped with the flames of fire and, being assailed by Hanumān, was burnt by his wrath and strength and, thus, it appeared like the city of Lankā afflicted by the curse.
 And the mighty Hanumān saw Lankā, full of fear, and dejected, and blazing with fire, and having a flame of fire for its crest, and furnished with the same energy as the self-create, like a mountain shaken by the wind.
 Having destroyed the forest abounding in footprints and having slain the mighty Raksasas in battle and having burnt the city adorned with precious gems and jewels, the Wind-god's son, the monkey, Hanuman, remained there.
 And having slain those many Rākşasas and cut down that forest and destroyed that many trees, and sent them up in flames to the abodes of the Raksasas, the high-souled one, setting his heart on Rama, departed.
 Thereupon the celestials, with the exception of the king of the gods, all worshipped that foremost of monkeys, that exceedingly powerful one, that leader of monkey-herds, that descendant of the Wind-god, that intelligent one, that best of monkeys, that one endowed with the speed of the Wind-god.
 All the celestials, all the foremost of Rishis, all the Gandharvas, all the Vidhyadharas, all the snakes, all the creatures, with their attendants, all went there, and they were filled with the highest delight.
 Having cut down the forest and slain the Rakshasas in battle, that highly effulgent monkey burnt down the city of Lanka and reigned in it.
 And, having taken his seat on a high hill with a charming prospect, that foremost of monkeys, looked like the sun with his flaming fingers.
 And having harassed the whole of Lanka, that foremost of monkeys set fire to the city with his tail.
 Thereupon seeing Lankā burnt down, the celestials with Gandharvas and Siddhas and great Rishis, were exceedingly surprised.
 Then seeing Lanka burnt, the celestials with the Gandharvas and Siddhas and the great Rishis were filled with wonder.
 Thus encouraged by the words of the noble-minded Lakşmaņa, Sugrīva, delighted and greatly gratified, spoke to his elder brother, the heroic Lakşmaņa.
 Forsooth, I am capable of being propitiated by all the celestials; and I am gifted with every accomplishment. You are my friend.
 O sinless one, if you be aided by me, you can even acquire the sovereignty of the celestials; what then, O lord, of your own kingdom?
 O descendant of Raghu, I am therefore, supported by my friends and relatives, who have been appointed to protect me, and by him whose friendship is like the fire in its test and whose race is the same as that of Raghava.
 In time you shall also come to know that I am worthy of you and that I have also the qualities of a companion. I am not able to tell you all the qualities which I have acquired.
 O best of men, the hearts of persons of great self-control and of noble souls are always full of peace and joy.
 The virtuous never cast off any of the ornaments, be they made of silver or gold, that are unbroken.
 Whether one is rich or poor, whether one is miserable or happy, whether one is virtuous or vicious, one's aged kinsmen are one's best refuge.
 O sinless one, the renunciation of wealth, of happiness, of country, for the sake of a friend, is caused by such affection.
 Saying "Be it so” to Sugriva, who was always ready with sweet words, Rama, like to Vasava himself, placed Lakşmaņa in the van, and proceeded along the path, with a beautiful Lakşmaņa before him.
 Then seeing Rāma and the mighty Lakşmaņa stationed, Sugrīva stretched out his arms and began to search the forest with his eyes.
 Thereupon that lord of the monkeys, saw a Sala tree, not far away, with its blossoms, branches and leaves, and with honey-bees all around it.
 And Sugrīva, with Rāma, sat down on a branch, furnished with leaves, and looking beautiful, of that tree.
 Beholding them both, Hanumān, taking a branch of a Sal tree, respectfully seated Laksmana.
 And like to the tranquil ocean, Rama was seated at ease. And in that foremost of hills, having the Sala flowers strewn there, Sugriva, with his eyes dilated with joy, spoke to Rāma, in words fraught with love.
 Alas, I am very much grieved. I have been deprived of my wife. I have to wander about in great sorrow, being exiled by my brother.
 O descendant of Raghu, being thus deceived by my brother, Vali, and feeling myself agitated, I was, in a forest, seized with fear, and my mind was confused.
 O you who are a terror to all, being terrified by the son of Vāli, I am a fugitive from the field, and you should show me your favour.
 Thus accosted, that highly energetic descendant of Raghu, conversant with all duties, smilingly replied to Sugrīva, saying.
 A friend is the fruit of the good act and a foe is the fruit of the bad act. I shall this very day kill the thief of your wife.
 These arrows of mine, O highly exalted one, are of the colour of the peacock's feathers and are possessed of great energy. They have been produced from the body of Kartikeya and are decked with gold. They are furnished with wings of the colour of the peacock and are like the flames of the fire of Mahendra. They have excellent shafts and sharp points. They are capable of making the enemy as angry as the snake.
 Behold your brother, the enemy of your brother, of immeasurable strength, his sins all washed away, slain by your shafts, like to a mountain split into fragments.
 Hearing the words of Rāghava, Sugriva, the leader of the monkey-army, was highly delighted and said, “Excellent, Excellent.”
 O Rāma, I am overwhelmed with grief and you are the refuge of those who are afflicted with grief. And for this, I am grieving for you, considering you as my friend.
 By the gift of your hand you have become my friend with the fire for a witness. By my life and truth I promise you.
 Considering myself as an old man and therefore feeling at ease, I am speaking to you thus. But my mind is always grieved at the thought of my separation from you.
 Having said this, with his eyes full of tears, he could not speak any more, though he wished to speak.
 And Sugriva in the presence of Rāma, with fortitude, bore the tearful downpour that had come like a river.
 Having suppressed his tears and shedding them on his beautiful eyes and breathing hard, that highly energetic one again spoke to Rāghava, saying.
 Formerly, O Rāma, Vāli, having been aggrieved with me, banished me from the kingdom, and having spoken harsh words, I have been humiliated by that powerful one.
 He has taken my wife from me, who is dearer to me even than my life. Those friends of mine who were united with me in the same bond (of marriage),
 And, O Rāghava, the wicked-minded one, exerting his utmost for my destruction, had killed many monkeys, slain by me.
 O descendant of Raghu, I am alarmed at seeing you as well as my own self, and I am afraid of you, for all men are afraid of calamities.
 It is only my followers, headed by Hanumān, who can help me. Therefore do I, even when engaged in the most difficult task, preserve my life.
 The grief of mine is over; these soft-hued monkeys are all round protecting me; they go with me when I go out and stand by me when I remain.
 O Rāma, I have briefly told you the whole story. Vāli, my eldest brother, is a powerful monkey, and is known in all the worlds.
 If my grief is not removed, then there will be no happiness in my life, and I shall not be able to enjoy it.
 O Rāma, this friend has been sent to you by me, who am afflicted with grief. Whether he is happy or not, he is my friend. The friend is always the refuge of his friend.
 Hearing these words of Sugriva, Rāma said, “What is the cause of the enmity between you? I wish to hear the truth."
 Hearing, O monkey, the reason for your enmity, I shall, after due consideration, bring about a reconciliation between you and Rāvana.
 My wrath, having been roused at your insult, is waxing, like the force of the spring-rain.
 Being delighted and confident, speak on, until the string of the bow is drawn. I have shot a shaft, and that arrow has pierced your foe.
 Thus addressed by the high-souled Kākutstha, Sugriva along with the four monkeys, was greatly delighted.
 Thereupon with his face beaming with joy Sugrīva, the eldest of the brothers, began to relate the real cause of the enmity.
 Thus addressed by the high-souled Kākutstha, Sugrīva was greatly delighted along with his four monkey-companions.
 Thereupon with a delighted countenance, Sugrīva, the elder brother of Lakşmaņa, began to relate the cause of enmity.
 Having pierced that mace with his arrows, Raghu's son, ever devoted to righteousness, smilingly said these angry words.
 O worst of the Rakshasas, I have shown you my whole strength. I am now helpless. You are therefore, acting in vain, by uttering loud shouts.
 This mace, broken by the shafts of your arrow, is lying on the ground; and it has been shattered in consequence of your not speaking to me what I asked.
 What you have said, that in the destruction of the Rākşasas, I will wash your face, is false, O Rāvana.
 I shall not suffer the life of this wretch, who is mean, who is of a mean disposition, who is a liar and who is a Rakshasa to be spared, even as I did not spare Garuda when he had drunk the nectar.
 Today the Earth shall drink the blood of the Rishi, with his throat pierced by my shafts and with his face smeared with froth.
 Your body is covered with dust, your breasts are fallen and your arms are contracted. And lying with the cow, you will sleep like a difficult to be got at beautiful woman.
 O you who are a foe to the Rakshasas, these Dandakas will be the sanctuaries to those who are in search of refuge when you will sleep with your sleep increased.
 O Rākşasa, in Janasthāna, when your forces have been slain with my shafts, the ascetics shall range at will through the entire forest.
 Today the Rakshasas, deprived of their friends, shall, with tears in their eyes, with their countenances downcast and trembling with fear, run away in all directions.
 Today will they come to know what sorrow is and what is useless, who are the wives of such a husband as you are, sprung as you are from a race fit to be your wife.
 You are a wicked wretch and your heart is full of malice. You are a constant thorn in the flesh of the Brahmanas. The oblations of the ascetics are consumed in the fire because they suspect you of treachery.
 Hearing the words of Rāghava, wrought up with anger, Khara, speaking in accents deep as the roar of the clouds, rebuked him, saying.
 You are intoxicated with pride and you are free from all fears; you do not understand that you are already under the sway of death, when you do say what is not proper and leave unsaid what is proper.
 O child, men, who are deprived of the five senses, are attached to the world and the chain of Time. They do not know what is to be done and what not to be done.
 Saying this to Rāma, the night-ranger, with his eyes contracted in wrath, cast his look around; and beholding a mighty tree in the field, he uprooted it, having its bark torn by the teeth.
 Then, lifting up (Rāma), and roaring (in fury), that mighty one, taking Rāma for his aim, hurled him, saying, “You have been slain.”
 Then having cut down that host with his arrows, the powerful Rāma, waxing wroth, set his mind on slaying Khara in battle.
 Thereupon, Rāma, with eyes reddened with anger, and with a thousand shafts, speedily pierced Khara.
 A profuse quantity of blood, like the waters of a fountain, spouted from the entrance of the shafts (of Rāma's arrows). And wounded with shafts in the encounter with Rāma, Khara, maddened by the scent of blood, rushed furiously towards Rāma.
 That hero, with his body bathed in blood and in a rage, having his weapons ready, rushed against the son of Drona.
 Then Rāma took up for slaying Khara in battle, that shaft resembling fire, like to another Brahma's rod.
 And the intelligent monarch of the celestials, the giver of wealth, the giver of boons, having received that boon from Indra, kept it and sent Khara away.
 And that great shaft, discharged with a whizzing sound, Rama having stretched his bow, discharged at Khara's breast.
 Thereupon the elephant, burnt by the fire of the arrows, fell down on the ground like a mountain burned by Indra in the White forest.
 And like Vritra slain by the thunder-bolt or Namuchi by the wind, the Balas, slain by Indra, fell to the ground.
 While they were thus engaged, the gods, the Charanas and the Kinnaras, accompanied by the sound of the Dundubhi, began to rain flowers on Rama. But the gods, filled with wonder, soon ceased to do this when they saw that in the space of a moment Rama had slain fourteen thousand Raksasas of terrible forms headed by Khara and Dushana.
 Ah, wonderful are the deeds of Rāma, who is well aware of his own self! Ah, the heroism and the prowess that is seen in Rāma, are like to those of Vişņu.
 Having said this, the celestials went to their respective abodes; and the royal sages, united with the highest sages, saluting Rāma, thus spoke to Agastya.
 O highly energetic one, the chastiser of Paka, the great Indra, came to the hermitage of Sarabhanga. It is for this that the great Indra, the chastiser of Paka, has come to this sacred asylum.
 For the destruction of these foes of ours, viz., those wicked Rakshasas, O son of Dasaratha, we have done this deed. The great Rishis will henceforth dwell in the forest of Dandaka.
 In the mean while the heroic Lakşmaņa, together with Sītā, issuing out of that mountain stronghold, took up his quarters in a pleasant hermitage.
 Thereupon the victorious Rāma, worshipped of the Maharsis, honoured by Lakşmaņa, entered the asylum.
 Seeing the slayer of foes, the happy Rishi, Vaidehi, became exceedingly pleased and embracing her husband said, “I am exceedingly glad to see you and also the Rakshasas slain and Rama invincible."
 Thereupon that Rākşasa, who had been worshipped by all the troops, and who had been embraced by all the delighted Rākşasas, on beholding Janaka's daughter, rejoiced exceedingly.
 Thereupon, those birds, those monkeys, ascending the trees, began to rejoice together with great delight, and to roar like lions.
 Hearing Sampati's words concerning Ravana's destruction, the monkeys, eager to behold Sita, cheerfully proceeded towards the ocean.
 Having come to that place, those of mighty prowess saw there the image of the whole world in full.
 Having arrived at the southern sea, and having passed through the northern sea, the highly powerful heroes of the monkey host encamped there.
 Beholding a mass of water resembling a mountain, the monkeys were struck with surprise and terror; and the lords of the Dānavas, living in the submarine regions, were also greatly agitated.
 Beholding the ocean as impassable as the sky, all the monkeys together, desiring to know what to do, began to tremble.
 Seeing the army depressed, that best of monkeys, cheered up those affrighted monkeys, by encouraging them.
 One should not give way to sorrow. Grief is worse than a fault. Sorrow destroys a man as a snake destroys a child.
 He, who is afraid of being defeated in battle, cannot succeed in accomplishing his purpose by means of his energy.
 On the expiration of that night, Angada again consulted with the old monkeys, and consulted with them.
 And surrounding Angada, the monkey army looked like the army of the Maruts surrounding Vasava.
 Who else except Vāli and Hanumān can check the monkey host, on one side or the other.
 Thereupon, that son of the king, the handsome Angada, having honoured those old monkeys and that army, spoke these words fraught with sense.
 What, O highly powerful one, will that one of unmitigated truth and prowess now do to Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, and to the ocean?
 Which hero among the monkeys can cross a hundred Yojanas and deliver all these chiefs from their fear?
 Let us go back. By the favour of whom shall we obtain our wives and children and houses. Behold we have attained our desire and are happy.
 Having received his permission, we, rejoiced, will repair to Rāma, the highly powerful Lakşmaņa and the monkey-chief, Sugriva. And if there be any monkey among you who is capable of crossing over the ocean, let him speedily bestow on us a safe and sacred present.
 Once more Angada, the foremost of monkeys, said to them, "O best of strong ones, you are all endowed with firm vigour. You have sprung from excellent families and are always honoured.
 Do you say who is he whose strength is such that he may be able to cross this river, O foremost of monkeys?
 Hearing the angry words of Trisanku, O Rama, the hundred sons of the ascetic said to the king, “You have been rejected by your truthful and virtuous preceptor, as being destitute of the requisite qualities. How then did you pass by the branch, the king of which was rejected by your preceptor?
 The best of the Ikshvaku race is the Purudhah, the priest of all the Ikshvaku race. And the speech of the truthful Purudhah cannot be transgressed.
 The holy and exalted Rishi Vasishtha said, 'It is impossible.' We, however, are able to perform that sacrifice.
 O foremost of men, you are childish, go back to your kingdom. O king of the earth, we are incapable of bearing the insult of that divine being, even if he were to insult the three worlds.
 Hearing their angry words, the king once more said to them, “The illustrious Rishi has refused to grant me his daughter. I shall therefore go to some other place. Good betide you, O ascetics!
 Hearing these dreadful words, the sons of the Rishis became exceedingly angry and said, "You shall become a cannibal." Having said this, the great Rishis went to their respective hermitages.
 When the night had passed away, the king was carried by the Chandalas. The king was attired in a blue garment, and his hair was matted. And he had a garland of citrons round his neck and he was decked with an iron ornaments.
 Seeing the king thus transformed into a Chandala and seeing him in that state, all the ministers, together with the citizens, fled away, leaving Kākutstha alone.
 O Rāma, the ascetic Viśvāmitra, having been burnt by the solar rays, appeared in the form of a Chāndāla, and approached me. O hero, out of compassion the highly energetic and virtuous sage said, 'O you of dreadful appearance, what is your purpose in coming here, O you of mighty strength? O lord of the earth, you have been cursed with the shape of a Chāndāla.'
 Hearing those words the king, who had fallen into the state of a Chandala, with folded hands, addressed that learned one, who was an expert in the use of words.
 I was rejected by my preceptor and also by his sons. I could not get what I desired. In consequence of this I have been deprived of my senses.
 But you, O handsome one, have not attained the fruits of the hundred sacrifices of mine, although you have been my servant in body.
 I have never told an untruth before and I will never tell one now, even in distress, O gentle one. By virtue of my being a Ksatriya, I have taken this oath.
 The subjects are protected by many kinds of sacrifices and virtue. The high-souled preceptors are satisfied by observing good conduct and behaviour. Those preceptors who are desirous of securing the prosperity of their disciples, who wish to acquire virtue, and who wish to perform sacrifices, cannot satisfy them. I consider that Destiny is supreme. Manhood is not so.
 Destiny is the cause of all. Destiny is the highest end. You should do what is for my good, who is so greatly afflicted and who is praying for your grace.
 I have no other refuge; I have no other resort. It behoves you to use your own power to turn the course of Destiny.
 Rāvana, being asked by Mārīca, did not accept his words, as a dead man does not accept medicine.
 Thereupon, urged by time, he said to that counsellor of the Rakshasas, Maricha, who was speaking what was for his own good,
 O Maricha, I have thus related to you a useless story without any object, like a seed cast into a barren soil.
 Forsooth, I am incapable of being wounded by you in battle, you being a fool and of sinful habits, and you being a mere man.
 That friend of yours, forsaking his kingdom and his mother and father, has gone into the forest, hearing the words of a female and the common talk of a female. It is certain that, in a battle with that slayer of Khara, Sītā, dearer to me than my life, must be carried away by me, in your sight.
 O Marica, this is my resolve, which is fixed in my mind, and it cannot be changed even by the gods and the Asuras with their weapons.
 If you have been asked about the merit of a particular course of action, you should tell me what is good for me, whether it leads to the desired end or not.
 It is proper for a king to speak to his ministers after being embraced by them with joined hands.
 The king should be addressed in sweet and mild words that are agreeable to him and beneficial to the king.
 When the king is given proper and good advice, he does not follow it for fear of losing his dignity and respect.
 The great monarchs, O chastiser of foes, maintain in their persons five forms of energy, viz., those of Fire, Indra, the Moon, Yama, and Varuna, in their respective forms of heat, vigour, mildness, severity, and satisfaction.
 Therefore, in all circumstances, persons of my order should be honoured and adored. But you, ignorant of morality, and relying upon your delusion, spoke harshly to one who had come to you for your welfare, without inquiring into his good qualities and defects, and without inquiring into your own welfare, O Raksasa.
 O you of immeasurable prowess, although I have thus asked you, you should still assist me in this affair.
 Hear what my words are in this matter. You should become a deer with golden colour and adorned with silver spots. And living in Rāma's asylum, you should range with Sītā at the head of the herd. And enticing Vaidehi, you should do what you like and go wherever you wish.
 Seeing you who are so wonderful and who are also gold, Mithilā's daughter will immediately say, 'Bring this to Rāma.'
 After Kakutstha had gone away, going a little distance, do you tell me, "O Sītā, O Lakşmaņa, O Rāma, O Rāma."
 Hearing of Rāma's coming to the hermitage, Sumitrā's son, urged by Sītā, was following the agitated Lakşmaņa.
 And when Kākutstha shall have gone, and Laksmana shall have departed, I will bear away Vaidehī, even as the lord of the thousand eyes had borne away Sachi.
 O son of Mārica, O you of excellent vows, having thus done your business, do you go; I will give you half of my kingdom.
 O mild one, go you this way, which is conducive to the growth of this work. I shall follow you, with my car, in the forest of Dandaka.
 Having obtained Sītā and deceived Rāma, I shall now go to Lankā, having performed my purpose with your help.
 But if you do not, O Marica, I shall slay you today. This I must do, even by force, for one who stands against the king cannot succeed in his endeavours.
 Coming to this (place), you have certainly been deprived of your life by me, as it was I who opposed you when you were between life and death. Therefore, considering all this, do you what is proper (in this matter).
 O king, at some time Yudhajit, the king of the Kekayas sent his spiritual guide, the great ascetic, the son of Angiras, the Brahmarshi of immeasurable power, with ten thousand horses, excellent presents, good cloths, precious skins, and excellent ornaments.
 Hearing that the great Rishi Garutman had come to his maternal uncle, the intelligent Raghava with his younger brother went a distance of a thousand paces to welcome him, and paid him homage, like Indra worshipping Brihaspati.
 Having adored the Rishi and accepted his wealth, he enquired after the welfare of his maternal uncle and seated himself in order to consult with that highly blessed one. And Rama asked him, saying, "What is the object of the worshipful Rishi's coming here? He is like to Brihaspati himself in the knowledge of words."
 Hearing Rāma's speech, the Maharsis began to speak in detail to Rāma, resembling the celestial language, O mighty-armed one, O best of men, your maternal uncle said, "If it please you, hear my words, that are full of love for Yudhajit.
 This is the land of the Gandharvas, adorned with fruits and roots. On the banks of the Sindhu, there is a beautiful country. And the Gandharvas, accomplished in war, with their weapons, protect it. O hero, the three kotis of the daughters of the prince of Shailusa are endued with great strength.
 Having conquered them, O Kākutstha, do you, O mighty-armed one, with concentrated mind, take up your abode in that beautiful Gandharva city. And that country is delightful to you. I have not said any thing to you that is not good.
 Hearing the words of the Rishi and his maternal uncle, Rāma pleased, said to Bharata, "Be it so" and looked at him.
 Being thus addressed, Rama, with a delighted heart, said to the Brahmana, These two heroic sons of Bharata, Taksha and Puşkala, will range this country. These two, being well guarded by their maternal uncle and being devoted to the observance of the ordinances, will range this country, followed by Bharata and his army. And having killed the sons of the Gandharvas, they will divide the kingdom between them.
 Having first installed you both in the kingdom, and then installed my sons, that virtuous and noble king will again come to me.
 Having said this to Bharata, that foremost of all ascetics, that one of great strength, that one who had all his senses under control, that one who was conversant with the Vedas, the ascetic (Rama) commanded Bharata to take the two princes under his protection.
 Then, O amiable one, placing Angiras' son before him as a star, Bharata, together with the Kumaaras and his army, went out.
 And that army, invincible even to the celestials and following Rāma, went forth, resembling a host of Sākran, far and wide.
 Those creatures that subsist on flesh, those terrible Rakshasas, and those many fierce and cannibalistic ghosts, desirous of drinking blood, followed Bharata, desirous of eating the flesh of the son of Gandharva.
 A vast number of thousands of lions and tigers and elephants and birds of flight, and other animals, went before the army.
 That army, fatigued by the half month's march, appeared happy and healthy, and it was thronged by men who were pleased with their food and march.
 O gentle one, in the company of the sons of the Angirasa, Bharata, with his soldiers, started for the woods, having first consulted the auspicious day with the stars.
 And that invincible host, accompanied by Rāma, like to the Sakti (weapon) of Sakra himself, went far away from the city.
 Those creatures that were addicted to the practice of eating flesh and that were also very powerful, followed Bharata, being desirous of drinking blood. There were also hundreds and thousands of bloodthirsty and terrible creatures, the sons of Gandharvas, who were desirous of eating the flesh of Gandharva children.
 Thousands of lions, tigers, elephants and birds of the aerial order, proceeded in the van of the army.
 Having marched for half a month, the army reached the country of the Kekayas. The country was full of happy and well-fed people.
 Hearing those pious, well-worded and highly graceful words of Hanumān, Angada spoke as follows.
 And Sugriva has not got firmness of mind, purity of soul, absence of cruelty and simplicity of disposition, and prowess and patience.
 How does he know his own duty who, out of affection for his elder brother, takes for his wife the beloved wife of the latter, who is still living, and who, out of love for his mother, accepts her who is hated by her, as his own mother?
 O descendant of Raghu, that one, who has been married to his wife by an oath of truth and who has performed his rites, has been forgotten by him, who is famous for his great deeds. He whose good deeds are remembered by others, has been forgotten by him, who has been made afraid of Lakşmaņa. And it is on account of his fear of violating the virtue of truth that he has been sent to search for Sītā. And how will virtue be served in this?
 When a man is vicious, ungrateful, forgetful, fickle and of mean character, who then can trust him, especially if he belongs to a high family?
 Having placed his son on the throne, how will Sugriva maintain me, who am sprung from a hostile family?
 My counsellors are all at variance and my ministers are not all in their proper places, how then shall I, like a weak and helpless one, be able to save Kiskindhā?
 The deceitful, the wicked and the merciless Sugrīva, for the sake of the kingdom, will make me fast with the Upańśudanda (viper).
 I am resolved to observe the vow of fasting. Let all of you give me your permission to go home.
 I swear to you that I will not return to the city. I shall die here. Death to me is preferable to good fortune.
 And the king asked the welfare of the monkeys; and the king having asked their welfare, those strong and powerful ones, the sons of Raghu, replied, saying, 'O uncle, you have first asked our welfare; and, O father, you have also asked the welfare of Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, and of my mother and Rama.
 You should console my mother. She is naturally a mother fond of her children, she is mild and she is a ascetic. Hearing that I have met with destruction, she will certainly lose her life. Having said these words and saluting the old ladies, Durbala's son, the wicked Angada, entered the earth.
 As he stood there weeping, those foremost of monkeys, stricken with grief, shed tears from their eyes. And some of them began to abuse Sugrīva and extol Vali. And all of them surrounded Angada and waited to see how he would act.
 Hearing the words of Vali's son, those foremost of monkeys, sprinkling themselves with water, sat down with their faces towards the east on the right hand ends of the darbhas. And they were greatly pleased with the sight.
 The exile of Rāma, the destruction of Daśaratha, the destruction of Janasthāna, the destruction of Jayadru, the carrying away of Vaidehi, the slaughter of Vali, the fright of monkeys at the tale of Rāma's wrath.
 The mighty mountain, (Kailasa), with its numerous caves resembling huge hills and trees, looked like the sky filled with clouds pouring torrents of rain.
 Then that hero, the commander of the army, the Raksasa Prajangha, resembling a blue cloud, with joined hands, said.
 The celestials, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Pishachas, the Patagas and the snakes, all are capable of being defeated; what to speak of men?
 All these people have been deceived by Hanumān and have been thus brought here. If I had not come here, they would have escaped into the forest.
 He said: Let your servant, the monkey, be pleased with the whole earth extending to the sea and having mountains, woods and forests.
 I will make arrangements for your protection, O monkeys and bears and Raksasas. Your grief, originating from your own wrong-doing, shall not touch you.
 Thereat Durmukha, the Rākşasa, waxing wroth, said, 'This will not do; this is no means of subduing all of us; this is a great humiliation to us before and behind the lord of the Rākşasas and is an insult to the lord of monkeys.'
 Having entered the ocean or the sky, I shall come back alone and bring back the monkeys with me.
 Then the highly powerful Vajradanta, becoming greatly enraged, took up a terrible bludgeon, smeared with flesh and blood.
 What can be done by the weak and the ascetic Hanumān? The invincible Rāma, with Lakşmaņa and Sugrīva, is there.
 Today will I come to Rāma with Sugriva and Laksmana, having slain the monkey-host, single-handed.
 O king, I wish to tell you another thing. A person, who is not inattentive and who is an expert in stratagems, can succeed in conquering his enemies.
 O lord of Rākşasas, a thousand Rākşasas, terrible, fierce, with awful visages, and capable of assuming forms at will, are stationed here, O Raksasa, with the intention of putting an end to the life of the descendant of Raghu, and of obtaining his human form. And they, having assumed the shape of men, will, approaching Kākutstha, address that foremost of Raghus, saying, 'We have been sent by your younger brother Bharata. And he will, having risen from his bed, speedily set out.'
 Thereupon, myself and others, with spears and darts and maces in our hands, and with bows and arrows and swords, ran at once, and killing that army of monkeys, we placed ourselves in the sky. And we began to kill the monkeys with great numbers, and then we made them enter into the region of Death by means of a shower of stones.
 O king, if Rāma and Lakşmaņa are not present, this army must, forsooth, be slain, and thus they shall have to lose their lives.
 Thereupon the highly powerful hero, the greatly intelligent Kumbhakarna, named Nīkumbha, spoke to Rāvana, the destroyer of men, saying.
 All of you have been protected by the great monarch. I alone will kill Rāghava along with Lakşmaņa. Sugriva and Hanuman, and all the monkeys here.
 Then the Rākşasa, named Vajrahana, resembling a mountain, waxing wroth, began to lick his lips and utter these words.
 Be you free from anxiety. Let each of you do as he likes. I shall alone destroy all these monkeys.
 Let all be in peace and sports and drink the wine of Varuna (wine). I shall slay Sugrīva and Laksmana and Hanumān and Angada and all the monkeys that are here.
 Thereupon, highly pleased, the foremost of counsellors, Hanuman, began to relate to Rāma, the son of Raghu, why he had come to that solitary forest.
 And in the forest your brother Laksmana, with the illustrious Lakşmaņa, and your wife, the daughter of the king Janaka, Maithili, was carried away by the Raksasa. And, deprived of his wife, he (Laksmana), with the intelligent Laksmana, was wailing. And, having slain a vulture that had been attracted by the separation of his wife, he became exceedingly sorry for the loss of his wife.
 I shall soon take you away from this grief which you suffer on account of separation from your husband. I shall take you away like a woman whose Veda and Shruti are lost.
 Whether she be in the nether regions or in the sky, I shall bring her to you, O chastiser of foes and make her your wife.
 O descendant of Raghu, what I say is true, do not grieve for her. O mighty-armed one, she is like a food that has been prepared by poison, and therefore she cannot be destroyed even by the Indra and the Asuras. O mighty-armed one, leave your grief and bring back your beloved wife.
 I know that the princess of Mithilā is certainly being carried away by me, for I have seen her myself, crying out, "O Rāma! O Rāma!" and "O Lakşmaņa!" and "O Laksmana!" and like a wife of a serpent-chief, writhing in Rāvana's embrace.
 And seeing me standing on the breast of the mountain with my fifth (ear) cut off, she (the Rākşasī) threw away her upper garment and her ornaments.
 O Rāghava, these things have been accepted by us and also concealed. I shall bring them to you; it behove you to recognise them.
 Then Rāma spoke to Sugriva, the sweet-speeched, saying, "O friend, do you quickly bring me. Why do you delay?”
 Having been thus addressed, Sugrīva entered the deep cave of the mountain with a desire to do good to Rāma. And having placed the canopy and the ornaments (in the cave), the monkey thus spoke to Rāma, “Do you see this."
 Having put on excellent raiment and ornaments, he became like the moon veiled with clouds.
 Overwhelmed with the tears that were shed for Sītā, he, crying 'O dear' and 'Alas' fell to the earth.
 And having in his heart made excellent ornaments, the snake breathed heavily like a snake in a hole, worked up with rage.
 Seeing Sumitra's son, the son of Dasaratha, with his eyes still full of tears, Rāma, with a sorrowful heart, began to address him.
 O Lakşmaņa, behold, Vaidehi has been forcibly carried away, leaving her upper garment and ornaments on the ground.
 Surely the ornaments are being taken away by Sītā as she goes away, for this is the state of things.
 Thus addressed by Rāma, Lakşmaņa said, “I do not know what earrings are; and I am not acquainted with the meaning of the word “Kundala.”
 I know you always by your salutation to my feet. Thereupon Rāma spoke to Sugriva, saying, O Sugriva, tell me the place where you have seen the damsel of mine, who has been carried away by the terrible Rākşasa, dear to me.
 Where is that mighty Rakshasa that is the cause of my every grief? I shall kill all the Rakshasas for that purpose.
 I am certain that the enemy who has carried away Maithili and who has roused my anger, will be sure to close his eyes for ever.
 O monkey, I will today take him, the enemy of mine who had stolen my dear wife from the forest in the dead of night and take him to the abode of Death.
 Commanded by Janaka, those messengers, riding on poor beasts, passed three nights on the way and then entered the city of Ayodhyā.
 On the king's command, they went to the palace and saw the king Dasaratha, who looked like a celestials.
 Thereat all the envoys with joined hands, without any hesitation, addressed the king in sweet accents, saying, “O king, the royal sage Janaka of the kingdom of Mithila, after performing his Agnihotra (sacrifice), frequently in sweet words, inquires after your health and welfare with your ministers and priests,
 Having inquired after the health of Vaidehi, the king of Mithila, at the command of Kaushika, said to him.
 Formerly, my son had promised me that he would be the head of the king, and that he would not spare the kings who had caused his anger.
 This daughter of mine, O king, has been defeated by your sons at the desire of Vishvamitra. This bow of great power, O mighty-armed one, which is the source of our wealth, was broken by the great-souled Rama in the midst of a great assembly.
 I wish to redeem my promise, O high-souled one, by giving Sītā to you as a price for your prowess. You should therefore grant me permission.
 O great king, go there in company with your preceptor and priest. Good betide you! You should, indeed, see the Rāghava.
 O king of kings, you should fulfill my promise. You will then win the love of both your sons.
 Thus the lord of the Videhas spoke in sweet words; and then obeying the order of Viśvāmitra, Śatānanda remained where he was.
 Hearing the words of the envoy, the king, greatly delighted, said to Vasishtha, to Vamadeva and to his ministers.
 And the descendant of the race of Raghu, who has been the delight of Kausalya, is living in the country of the Videhas with his brother Lakshmana.
 And the highly powerful Janaka having seen the prowess of Rāma, desire to present his daughter to him.
 If you like to hear about the high-souled Janaka, let us go speedily to his city, that time may not be lost.
 The ministers and all the great Rishis said, 'Very well.' The king also, having been thus pleased, said to the ministers, 'To-morrow we shall start.'
 Those three kings, gratified with the hospitality of the monarch, spent the night in great delight and with all the agreeable accomplishments.
 Thus addressed by the heroic Khara having a beautiful nose, Khara, the king of the Rākşasas, said these harsh words to Khara, the foremost of the Rākşasas.
 Your disdain has roused in me a great and immeasurable anger, which is incapable of being borne like sea-salt.
 I do not consider Rāma a man, for he is lifeless like me, and has been deprived of his vital airs by the actions of his own hands.
 Let this grief be dried up, and this anxiety be removed! I will take Rāma along with his brother to the abode of Yama.
 O Rakshasa, you are drinking the warm blood of Rama, whose life had been taken by the axe, on the ground.
 Hearing those words from the face of Khara, the highly pleased daughter of Māndhātā, once more extolled her brother, the foremost of Rākşasas.
 Then, being reprimanded by her, he again praised her, and then the mighty Khara, the leader of the forces, spoke thus to Dushana.
 O mild one, O amiable one, do you make arrangements for the fourteen thousand fearful and unretreating Rākṣasas, resembling clouds of blue hue, ever engaged in the destruction of the worlds, and who are ready for every exertion.
 O amiable one, do you soon bring my chariot, bow, arrows, variegated swords and various whetted darts.
 O you that are conversant with battle, I desire to kill that wicked Rāma, the son of the high-souled Pulastya race.
 While he was speaking thus, Dushana, with the help of his followers, yoked the mighty car, which was as bright as the sun, to the horse,
 That Kharā descended from the car, which was of the form of the summit of the Meru, which was adorned with ornaments of burnished gold, which was encompassed with a golden girdle, which was like the jewelled palace of Kuvara, which was covered with flowers, trees, and hills, all of gold and of the colour of the moon, which was surrounded by the auspicious birds and the stars, which was filled with the sounds of bells and the music of the Kinnaris, and which was yoked with horses, and in consequence of his wrath, he ascended (that car).
 Dushana also seeing that large army of the monkeys, chariots, armour and weapons and elephants, said to the Rakshasas-"Let us all proceed."
 Thereupon fourteen thousand terrible Rākşasas, with their fearful armour, weapons, and banners, issuing out of the city, began to produce loud roars. And with their heads decked with gold, and with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes, with their hands furnished with lances, swords, scimitars, and pikes
 Seeing those terrible-looking Rākṣasas fly away, Khara's car proceeded onward.
 Then, knowing Khara's mind, the charioteer urged on the horses decked with gold and adorned with trappings.
 Thus commanded, the car of Khara, the destroyer of foes, speedily filled the cardinal and subsidiary points with its noise.
 Then Khara, a powerful and terrible antagonist, like to Death himself, speedily came, roaring like a cloud and showering arrows like rain.
 Thereupon the monkey, Hanumān, reflecting on what Tārā had said, and the prowess of Tārā's lord, at last concluded that Angada had stolen away the kingdom.
 Hanumān considered Vāli's son, gifted with eight attributes and furnished with four principal faculties, to be possessed of four times his own strength and endowed with sixteen times his own energy, strength and prowess, ever increasing in energy and strength like to the moon at the full, having the same wisdom as his father, equal to Brihaspati in prowess, ever serving Tārā like to Purandara serving the lord of celestials.
 Hanumān, well versed in all the branches of learning and weary of waiting for the welfare of his master, began to devise (various plans).
 And he, thus taking a second means (besides the means of the four), began to sow dissensions among the monkeys by his words.
 When all the (three) armies were broken, the king then began to speak to Angada in angry and harsh words, calculated to irritate him.
 You are, O Tāreya, for certain, more capable of bearing the burden of the kingdom of monkeys than your father; and you are for certain more capable of bearing the burden of war than your father.
 O foremost of monkeys, these monkeys always have a restless mind. Without your presence, they will not be able to bear the grief for their sons and wives.
 I tell you that these monkeys, Jāmbavān, Nīla, Sugrīva and the mighty monkey Suhotra, cannot be won over by you by means of presents and conciliation. You cannot win them over by means of punishment; nor can you bring them over to your side by force.
 The weak man, when he is attacked by the strong, should not, for protecting himself, break up his seat. The seat is the body of the weak man and the strong man is the fire by which he is to be consumed.
 What you think to be the hand of Fate, is nothing but your own prowess. Therefore, O Laksmana, do you desist from the discharge of your shafts.
 But Indra, while he was in his rage, had done but little. But now Lakshmana will destroy Patraket with sharp arrows like to the wind destroying a little cloud.
 And Laksmana too has many such shafts, having the touch of thunder-bolt or of iron, like to the thunder-bolts of the celestials or the mountain-dwellers.
 O chastiser of foes, when you shall give out the order, all the monkeys shall be certain to abandon the conflict.
 Remembering their children and wives, always pained and hungry, afflicted with grief, and lying on beds of sorrow, they will follow you.
 Thus deprived of your friends, and of those who were well-wishers of your welfare, and of your relatives, you shall be worked up to the highest pitch of fury, and shall tremble like a leaf. Those dreadful and sharp arrows of Lakşmaņa, endowed with excessive impetuosity, and incapable of being baffled, shall, with their shafts, fall upon you, like a thunder-bolt falling on a mountain.
 You are humble and have approached us for our help. Therefore, Sugrīva will install you on the throne of Rākşasas.
 The virtuous king Yudhishthira, your paternal uncle, ever intent on doing good to others, steadfast in his vows, pure and truthful in his promises, will never bring about your destruction.
 I am dear to your mother, my life is devoted to her and your welfare; there is nothing else for me but Angada. Therefore go you (to the forest).
 Then the son of Gaurava showered a dreadful rain of blood, fierce, and made up of blood and water.
 The swift horses, yoked to the car of the king, fell down in a portion of the road that was studded with flowers.
 Then, O king, the sky was filled with clouds of a blue colour. The sun, having come out from the clouds, looked like the revolving wheel of a burning fire.
 Then the dreadful vulture, of terrible aspect, came up to the flag-staff having a golden staff and with his wings extended, and stood there.
 Then coming near to Janasthana, those terrible ones, with a sound resembling that of a chariot, uttered various sounds in that quarter, and the flesh-eating animals and birds, in that burning direction, began to utter dreadful sounds.
 Their horses torn with arrows and their blood flowing in streams, they looked beautiful as they moved on the sky that was not the sky, like to the clouds bearing the rains.
 The whole sky became dark with hair standing erect. The points of the compass, north and south, and the cardinal and subsidiary points of the compass, could not be distinguished.
 The evening looked like the colour of blood. The dreadful animals and birds, with their beaks turned upwards, sent out hideous cries.
 The Kankas, the buffalo and the lions, foreboding the arrival of danger, began to utter frightful roars. Dreadful and terrible in appearance, they began to send forth their roars, resembling those of the thunder, towards the weak.
 The shadow of a Kabandha appeared in the solar disc. And the mighty planet Svarbhanu seized the Sun in the middle of the day. And the wind began to blow violently, and the sun lost all his rays.
 The sky was full of stars, shining like the fire-flies. The rivers, the birds and the lotuses all had their leaves drooped down.
 In the twinkling of an eye the trees became destitute of flowers and fruits, and the clouds disappeared without rain.
 There rose up from that lake Sarikas of great beauty and beauty and also a great noise resembling that of the clouds and also showers of meteors of great effulgence.
 The earth with her mountains, forests and woods, began to tremble in consequence of the war-cries of that intelligent and highly powerful Khara, who was riding on his car.
 Then the left arm of Hanumān was shaken and his voice was choked. And his sight was obscured and he began to shake all over. And there was pain in his forehead and he became unconscious. Beholding those terrible and hair-stirring omens, Khara smilingly addressed the Rākşasas, saying.
 I am not afraid of these fearful omens which are manifesting themselves before me; nor do I consider the prowess of the powerful; as that of the weak. Tarā too with her sharp arrows can bring down from the welkin, (Rāvana) who is enraged with the duty of death; and without slaying Rāghava, and his brother Lakşmaņa, who are both prepared for battle, with those sharp arrows, I will not return.
 Let my sister be gratified in consequence of the change in Lakşmaņa's behaviour, and let her drink the blood of Rāma and Lakşmaņa.
 I have never been defeated in any battle before. You have seen this; therefore I am not speaking an untruth.
 He said to himself, "If I can kill the enraged king of the gods, who rides on the car of Airavata, who wields the thunderbolt in his hand, what need I say of those two men who are nothing but mortals?"
 Hearing his roar, the mighty host of Rākşasas was seized by the noose of death and began to wield dreadful weapons.
 The high-souled Rishis, the celestials, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the Charanas, all desirous of seeing the battle, came together and, addressing one another, said these words.
 Peace to all good men, and to those who are approved of by all. May Rāghava conquer in battle the Pulsatya and the Raksasas, even as the lord of celestials with his discus in his hand vanquish all the foremost of the Asuras.
 The great Rishis, who were all great masters of the science of creation, talked in this strain and the celestials who were present there also talked in this strain. And when the Rishis thus talked, they saw the Raksasas who had lost their lives in the battle.
 Khara, in his car, rushed out from the ranks of the army; and the mighty and fierce bird Yajñasatru, having a neck resembling the beak of a hawk, a body resembling a human body, and resembling a Vihanga bird, invincible, the son of Kāli, wearing a Karvira garland, a fierce warrior, having a bow named Kālākāra, wearing a garland of gold, wearing a garland of flowers, having a mouth like a vulture, and drinking blood, those twelve highly powerful heroes, with a fierce aspect, rushed at Khara.
 Mahākāpāla, Stūlaksa, Pramatha and Triśiras, these four followed Dushana in the rear of the army.
 The terrible and dreadful army of the Raksasas, having entered the field of battle, surrounded those two princes with great speed like the hosts of planets surrounding the Sun and the Moon.
 Seeing his brother slain and lying dead on the field, Vibhīşana, his heart stricken with grief, began to lament.
 O you, who are famous for your prowess and who are well-versed in the science of policy, what is the use of you lying on the ground, who are possessed of such a costly bed? Your two arms, that are adorned with bracelets and that have been deprived of their power of motion and that are also covered with your diadem, that is like the moon and that shines brightly,
 O hero, the results of my former words have been attained. What is not agreeable to you, has happened, as you are under the influence of passion and delusion.
 Neither the son of Prastra, nor the son of Indra, nor other men, nor the Atikaya, nor the Narantaka, nor the Kumbhakarna, nor the mighty chariot of the son of Surya, can be equal to this man (Bhima).
 The bridge of good policy has been destroyed; the war of virtue has been fought out; the prosperity of the virtuous has been ruined; the Sun has fallen on the Earth; the Moon has sunk in the darkness; the blazing fire has been extinguished; the season is past and the exertions of the warriors have ceased.
 What, now, is the remainder of the world, when the foremost of the Rakshasas, like a person asleep in the midst of the dust, is slain in battle?
 That mighty tree, having Rākşasa monarch for its trunk and asceticism for its root, with its branches resembling the heroes of the Rākşasa host, being shaken by the wind, began to shake.
 That one, who had taken possession of all the worlds by his prowess, who was the ruler of the race of the Ikşvāku kings, who was the lord of the race of the monkeys, who was the refuge of the afflicted and the abode of anger and mercy, who was like to the very flame of the fire in energy, who was the lord of all the three worlds, whose body was grasped by the two lions of the Ikşvāku race, that one, who was like to a serpent in energy, who was like to the very wind in speed, that one, who was the refuge of the entire universe, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the celestials, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the dead, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Asuras, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Pannagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Rakşasas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Gandharvas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Siddhas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Pannagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Yakşas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Vidyādharas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Pannagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Kinnaras, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Nagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Raksasas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Gandharvas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Siddhas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Pannagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Yakşas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Vidyādharas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Pannagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Kinnaras, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Nagas, that one, who was the lord of the lord of the Raksasas, that one, who was the lord of the
 And like to a fire that is extinguished with water, the strength of the enemy was weakened by the breath of Rāma, and, being thus weakened, he was reduced to a state of helplessness.
 And he wore a lion's skin and carried a bell on his neck and a tiger's tail on his waist and a noose in his hand. He wore a chain round his neck, and he had an iron chain round his neck, and he had an iron chain round his waist. He had eyes like those of a falcon and ears like those of an elephant and a nose like that of a jackal. He was always victorious in battle, and he had the smell of a lion.
 Hearing Vibhīşaņa speak thus, Rāma, overwhelmed with grief, said.
 This one, who is the foremost of all the warriors, who is ever ready to fight, who has a mighty prowess in battle, who is possessed of the greatest energy and who is never afraid, has been slain.
 Those that have followed the duties of the Kshatriya order, and those who have sought their own advancement, should not be mourned for even when they are slain in battle.
 He, who is the cause of the three worlds being terrified in battle by the three powerful gods, has now come to the right time. The time, therefore, is not to be lamented.
 Victory in battle is never certain; nor is defeat; a hero is sometimes killed by his foes; and sometimes he kills his foes in battle.
 Formerly, the course that is now followed by Kshatriyas was approved of by all. A Kshatriya, who is slain in battle, is not to be pitied.
 Having arrived at this decision and having fully satisfied his mind, that one free from all anxiety, reflecting on what should be done next, said.
 When the powerful prince had thus spoken, Vibhisana, burning with grief and thinking of his brother's welfare, said.
 You are the foremost of the celestials; you have been the first to be attacked by the celestials together with Vasava in battle, like the ocean being first attacked by the waves.
 This person (the king) has given away wealth to his friends, has enjoyed all sorts of luxuries, has been waited upon by his servants, has made presents to his friends and has killed his enemies.
 He is possessed of an exceedingly pure soul and is a performer of rigid austerities. He is the foremost of all men in the performance of sacrifices and of all kinds of acts. I desire, through your favour, to perform the funeral rites of that illustrious one who has passed away into the other world.
 Thus addressed by him in tender words, that great-souled prince, ever intent on doing good, granted the boon asked of him.
 The hostility between us is like to death itself. We should therefore cease from this. Let us make this arrangement for our mutual welfare.
 Hearing Sugriva's words, conducive to his welfare and fraught with great merit, Kākutstha promised to the monkey, and spoke thus,
 By the power of my asceticism, by my building a bridge and by drawing up the waters of the ocean, I am able to cross over this ocean.
 And how many fortresses does Lankā possess? Do you tell me this. I wish to know everything about her.
 Tell me truly, in detail, all that you have seen with regard to the strength of the forces, the state of the gates and the strong holds, the measures of defence, the abodes of the Rākşasas, the comforts and conveniences of Lankā, as also of the Rākşasa troops, and all that you have seen in the city in general.
 Hearing Rāma's speech, the Wind-god's son-Hanumān, the foremost of those versed in speech, said to Rāma, Do you listen to me as I relate to you, in accordance with the ordinance, all that is difficult to accomplish. I shall tell you how the city of Lankā has been protected, and by what forces; and how the Rākşasas have been won over to the side of Rāvana; and how Lanka has attained to great prosperity; and how the ocean has been rendered mighty; and how the troops have been arranged and how the vehicles have been allotted to the forces.
 Lankā, full of cars, and abounding in elephants and lions, looked resplendent with joy. It was full of Rakşasas and ghosts.
 The gates of that city are made of strong wood and are furnished with the yoke and the pole. There are four very wide and very beautiful gates.
 There is a great number of strong and powerful Upalayanas, and the army of the enemies is stopped there.
 The doors of the city were fitted with sharp arrows, as if made for the particular season, by hundreds of heroic Rakshasas.
 The walls of that mansion were made of pure gold and could not be approached. They were lined with trees made of gems and Vaidurya and adorned with lapis lazuli.
 On all sides there are great and fearful deeps of cold water and auspicious, unfathomable, full of crocodiles, and abounding in fishes.
 There were four gates to each of them, which were very wide and spacious and furnished with many mechanical contrivances.
 When the enemy's troops approach, all the men, coming under their influence, are seized with panic. The weapons are thrown away and the men run away to all sides.
 In the midst of the palace there was a beautiful platform on which stood a large and strong bedstead, made of gold and supported by many pillars.
 Rāvaņa, being his own self, had become anxious for battle; and, rising up, he did not wait for the sight of the troops.
 The city of Lankā, with her lofty walls, is a place that is terrible to the celestials. There are four kinds of artificial mountains, the Pārvata, and the Nāda.
 O descendant of Raghu, we are at the other shore of the ocean, which is so far distant. There are no boats there, nor any landmarks to guide us.
 The highly inaccessible city of Lankā, resembling the city of the celestials, was built on the mountain, and was furnished with elephants and horses.
 And the Parikhas and the Sataghnis and the various instruments of war beautify the city of the wicked-minded Ravana.
 On the other side of the gate, there stood a million of those foremost of Rakshasas, all having the strength of ten thousand elephants. They were all armed with clubs, and were incapable of being subdued.
 Then the Rakshasas that were stationed on the right wing of the army, were all destroyed by the excellent warriors of the fourfold army.
 And a division of Rākşasas, stationed at the western gate, with arms, and skilled in the use of weapons,
 And the Rakshasas, who were many thousands in number, stood, ranged in order, at the northern gate. And the excellent sons of the Kshatriya race, who were car-warriors and horsemen, were worshipped by the Rakshasas. And the Yakshas, who were incapable of being borne by thousands of men, stood on the shoulders of the Rakshasas.
 And the encampments were broken through by me and the ramparts were filled up with the earth. And the city Lankā was burnt down and the walls were battered.
 By what means and by whom shall we cross over to Varuna's abode? Do you therefore, O monkeys, take the city of Lankā with its people, captive.
 Angada, Dvivida, Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala, Nila, the leader of the monkey-army, what do you think of the rest of the monkeys, O descendant of Raghu, when they shall have reached the city of Rāvana and entered it, destroying mountains and trees, and bursting through the walls of the city, and the orchards, and the forts and buildings, and the gardens and groves, and bringing them hither?
 Quickly order the commanders of all your forces to assemble and march.
 Having heard those words of Angada, all those mighty ones, taking their stand for the battle, and, having recourse to the knowledge of Naiṣṭhika philosophy, turned back.
 And having their energy and strength excited, and their prowess increased, those monkeys, were brought to their senses by the words of the powerful Angada.
 Determined upon death, the monkeys, set out for battle, and then they began to fight, each resolved to lay down his life.
 Thereupon the monkeys, taking up huge trees and also big rocks, quickly approached Kumbhakarna.
 Then that highly powerful and huge-bodied Kumbhakarna, waxing wroth, taking up his mace, began to strike down all the monkeys with great force.
 The monkeys, scattered over the field, are lying on the ground, having been struck by Kumbhakarna.
 Having first seized sixteen, eighteen, ten, twenty and thirty birds, he kills them with his claws and devours them. And excited with rage, he kills all the birds as Garuda kills snakes.
 Having been thus encouraged and having met with each other in this way, the monkeys, with trees and rocks in their hands, stood in the midst of the battle.
 Then the best of monkeys, Dwivida, uprooting the mountain, fled away like to a river when the dam breaks.
 Then the monkey, lifting up the huge tree, threw it at Kumbhakarņa. The tree was not received by Kumbhakarņa. Thereat it fell among his forces. Thereat it crushed cars, elephants, steeds, excellent elephants and other Raksasas and cut off many heads.
 That mighty field of battle, with its steeds and charioteers slain and with its troops bespattered with blood, looked like a mountain struck by the force of a storm.
 And the wheels of those cars of the foremost of monkeys, with their fierce roaring, began to strike the heads of those heroes, resembling the Destroyer himself, with their arrows.
 And the high-souled monkeys uprooting huge trees began to slay elephants, horses, cars, and Akshasas.
 Hanuman, standing on the head of Kumbhakarna, began to shower down crags and rocks and various trees.
 And then that highly powerful Kumbhakarna, with his arrow, cut off those mountain peaks and also destroyed the forest of trees.
 Thereupon Hanumān, taking up his sharp-pointed dart, rushed at the terrific monkey-host. And Hanumān, taking up a dart, stood in front of the mountain, as it rushed towards him.
 Being thus addressed by Kumbhakarna, the enraged Indrajit struck the huge mountain with great force. The mountain, being thus struck, trembled and the earth was covered with blood and fat.
 Having pierced the Maruta with his shaft, resembling a flaming thunderbolt and having the effulgence of the mountain, Guha, with the strength of his arms, began to agitate the firmament like a Krauncha agitated by a strong wind.
 With his broad shoulders pierced by the shaft, Hanumān, in that mighty encounter, began to roar like the clouds at the end of the Yuga, sending up a loud shout.
 Seeing him (Rāvana) exceedingly afflicted, the Raksasas, with cheerful hearts, began to send up shouts of joy. And the monkeys, exceedingly aggrieved and greatly frightened, fled away from Kumbhakarma.
 Thereupon the highly powerful Nila began to create obstacles in the way of the highly intelligent Kumbhakarna. And he threw a mountain on him.
 Then, seeing that mountain top rush towards him, he caught it up in his grasp and struck it with his fist. Thus struck, the mountain-top was rent into pieces and fell with a loud crash on the earth.
 Rishabha, Sharabha, Nila, Gavaksha and Gandhamadana, these five foremost of monkeys rushed against Kumbhakarna.
 Those highly powerful ones, having great bodies, then in the battle struck with their hands, feet, trees, stones and other weapons that great elephant with its trunk.
 He did not feel any pain, although he felt every blow and every stroke. He embraced with his arms that mighty boar.
 Thus pressed by the arms of Kumbhakarna, that foremost of monkeys, that terrible one, fell down, with blood flowing from his mouth.
 Having killed Sarabha with his fist and Nila with his thigh, Indrajit struck Gavaksa with his mace.
 And with great speed he struck Gandhamadana with his foot. And they all, afflicted with the stroke and bleeding profusely, fell down on the earth, like creepers cut off.
 When those high-souled leaders of the monkeys were thrown down (by Kumbhakarņa), thousands of monkeys fled away.
 And all those foremost of monkeys, resembling hills, ascending the hill, and leaping up, bit the monkey.
 Then those foremost of monkeys, Kumbaras, struck the mighty-armed Kumbhakarna with their nails, teeth, fists and arms.
 And like a mountain, that foremost of monkeys, resembling a thousand clouds, and resembling a mountain, that foremost of monkeys, resembling a thousand mountains, looked beautiful like a mountain with its summits and caves.
 Like Garuda consuming snakes, that one of great strength, taking up all the monkeys with his arms, began to devour them.
 And the monkeys, hurled at the tortuous Patala-like mountain by Kumbhakarna, did not drop down through the ears of Karna.
 And that best of Rākşasas, excited with ire, and resembling a hill, began to destroy the monkeys.
 That Rākṣasa, wandering in the army, began to make the earth reek with flesh and blood, like to the fire of the dissolution, agitated by the wind.
 As the thunder-armed Indra, or as the ten-handed Death with his noose, so that highly powerful Kumbhakarna appeared in battle with a lance in his hand.
 Just as the fire burns up dry forests in summer, so Kumbhakarna consumed the monkey-host.
 And the monkeys, deprived of their lives, with their troops slain, and overwhelmed with fear, began to emit hideous cries.
 Struck by Kumbhakarna, the monkeys, with their minds agitated, proceeded to Rāghava for protection.
 Beholding his monkeys thus broken, Vajrahasta's son (Rāvana) rushed furiously against Kumbhakarņa in that dreadful conflict.
 Shaking his mighty horns, which emitted roars every moment, he terrorised all the Rakshasas, the followers of Kumbhakarna.
 And hurled at the head of Kumbhakarna a mountain-top. And that mountain-top, striking Kumbhakarna on the head, set him afire with anger. And that enraged Kumbhakarna, burning with wrath, rushed furiously at Vali's son, who was inflamed with fury, and who was agitating all the monkeys. And the mighty Kumbhakarna, worked up with wrath, in that battle, hurled a dart at Angada.
 That highly powerful monkey-chief, well acquainted with the rules of warfare, made the highly powerful and strong Ravana, fly away with ease.
 Then rising up speedily and striking him with his palm, he struck him on the breast. Thus struck by him, he became enraged and lost his senses, like a mountain.
 Thereupon that Raksasa, highly powerful, regaining his senses, with a smile took up a fistful of dust and threw it at him; and immediately he fell down senseless.
 And on that foremost of monkeys, being deprived of his senses, having fallen on the earth, Sugriva taking up that dart rushed at him.
 Beholding the highly powerful Kumbhakarna coming towards him, the heroic king of monkeys-Sugriva-leaping from a mountain, advanced with force and struck Kumbhakarna with a mountain.
 Then beholding that monkey coming towards him, Kumbhakarna stood before the lord of monkeys, with his whole person stretched out.
 Seeing Kumbhakarna seated and eating large animals, with his person besmeared with blood, Sugriva said.
 You have fallen the heroic and done a very difficult feat. Your army have been devoured and you have attained the highest glory. What are you going to do with this monkey-army? I shall make one blow at this mountain of mine, O Raksasa, let us fight it out.
 Hearing these words of the lord of monkeys, possessed of energy and patience, that foremost of Raksasas, Kumbhakarma, spoke thus.
 O monkey, you are the grandson of Prajapati and the son of Varshakara and are gifted with patience and prowess.
 Hearing Kumbhakarma's words, he instantly rent the mountain and hurled it at Kumbhakarma. That mountain, resembling a thunderbolt, fell on Kumbhakarma's breast.
 Then at once the huge mountain, called the Shala, split in two pieces in the midst of his arms. And all the birds and the Rākşasas began to dance for joy.
 Struck on the head by the mountain top, the king became enraged and opening his mouth wide he began to roar. And to destroy the king of horses and elephants, he threw down his lance resembling the lightning in the sky.
 Then, quickly rising up and catching up the whetted and gold-hafted spear which had been loosened from the grasp of Kumbhakarma, the son of the Wind-god, with great force, broke it in two pieces.
 Then, taking up the great and terrible iron dart of a thousand weights, the delighted monkey broke it in pieces.
 Seeing the broken shaft Hanumān had hurled, the monkeys, exceedingly delighted, began to utter shouts on all sides.
 The Rakshasa was filled with fear and he turned away. The monkeys, delighted, sent forth their war-cries. They paid homage to the wind-god, seeing that he had been struck with the dart.
 Seeing his lance thus shattered, the lord of the Raksasas, of high soul, grew exceedingly angry. And uprooting the mountain Lankā, with her summits, he went towards Sugriva, intent on destroying him.
 And pierced with the summits of the mountain, that lord of monkeys, deprived of consciousness, fell down on the earth. And seeing him, the monkeys, deprived of consciousness, were delighted.
 And the terrible Kumbhakarna, displaying his prowess, fought with Sugriva, the lord of monkeys; and, like to a tempest whirling the clouds, he, taking the latter by surprise, carried him off.
 Then Kumbhakarna, tearing him out of the earth, and going to battle, appeared like Meru himself, towering above all the worlds, and like Meru with his dreadful summits.
 Then the heroic lord of Rākşasas, accompanied with the Rākşasas, and eulogised by them, went to the place where were the monkeys, and the celestials, and the people, and the sages, and the bears, and the monkeys, and the elephants, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the monkeys, and the
 Thereupon, Indrajit, taking that bow resembling the thunderbolt, thought, “If I slay this enemy of the king of the celestials, all these will be slain, and all the army of Rāvana along with Rama."
 Beholding that army of the learned assembled from every quarter and Sugriva seized by Kumbhakarna, the intelligent Hanumān, the son of the Wind-god, thought to himself, What should I do now Sugriva is seized?
 If I should do what is proper, I shall certainly do it; and assuming the form of a mountain, I shall destroy the Rākşasa.
 When the mighty Kumbhakarna with a broken body, has been killed by me, when the lord of monkeys, has been released, let the monkeys be pleased altogether.
 Or, the monkey may gain his freedom of himself. And, if he is taken by the celestials, Asuras, Uragas (serpents) and Rakshasas,
 I think the lord of monkeys does not yet recollect his own self, being struck by the mountain hurled at him by Kumbhakarna in battle.
 Within this short while Sugrīva shall recover his sense in this mighty conflict, and do what is for his own and the monkeys' behoof.
 By rescuing the high-souled Sugriva, I shall incur the enmity of the monkey hosts and bring down the everlasting reputation of the monkeys. Therefore, before the monkeys are released, I shall, for a moment, frighten them with my prowess and thus, by assuring them for a while, I shall set them free.
 Having thought thus, the Wind-god's son Hanumān again stopped the army of monkeys.
 And taking that great boar, Kumbhakarna entered Lankā, worshipped by the dwellers of the palace and the chariots and the gateways, and with flowers at the end of his arms.
 Gradually being wetted with showers of fragrant flowers and gradually being cooled by the breeze, the mighty-armed king (Rama) recovered his senses.
 The high-souled (Arjuna) then regaining his consciousness, with his hands in the lap of Dvivara, sat in the streets of the city, gazing at the kings.
 How can I now perform my promise with her, who has been thus seized by me? I will, however, do as will be agreeable to the monkeys and will also be for my good.
 Thereupon, that foe of the enemy of the immortals, the king, suddenly rushing upon the monkey, pierced him with his nails, tore his ears and wounded him with his foot.
 And the son of Kumbhakarna, deprived of his ears and nose, and with his person mangled by the monkey, and inflamed with wrath, fell down dead on the ground, drinking up blood and water.
 Thus struck by those enemies of the gods with their maces, he fell to the ground, and then with the speed of the thunderbolt, rose to the sky and again came back to the earth,
 Kumbhakarna, the powerful one, deprived of his nose and his ears, appeared like a mountain with lakes.
 And a huge-eyed Rākşasa of dreadful aspect, who, in anger, was spouting blood, appeared, Ravana's younger brother, resembling a mass of blue collyrium, and like to the cloud charged with rain, and, set forth for conflict.
 When the king of the celestials had gone, his enemy, remembering the words uttered by him, rushed once more to the field of battle, and that terrible one, having thought within himself, “I have no weapons," took up the Mucika (the mace).
 Thereupon Kumbhakarņa of great soul, issuing from his chamber with his wife and his troops, began to devour in battle the mighty monkey-host like the all-consuming fire at the end of a Yuga.
 Then the Kumbhakarna, inflamed with the desire of food, entering into that terrible monkey-army, began to destroy the Rakshasas, the Pishachas, the Niskashas and the other Rakshasas, as death at the end of a Yuga destroys the principal persons of the world.
 Thereupon, in great wrath, the Raksasa, taking up one bow and two quivers and a number of arrows, hurled them all at the monkeys.
 The highly powerful Nila, whose flesh and blood were being drunk up by those mountain kings, began to eat up the monkeys.
 The monkeys thus feasting, were suddenly attacked by the angry Kumbhakarma. He rushed upon them with great rage, and caught one hundred and twenty thousand.
 And like a dreadful Yuga at its close, that one, his person drenched in blood, his hands engaged in handling the bow and his eyes fixed on the enemy, poured forth shafts furnished with sharp points.
 At that time, Lakşmaņa, the son of Sumitrā, that subduer of hostile cities, enraged, fought a fight with his adversary.
 Then Lakşmaņa, possessed of prowess, received seven arrows from Kumbhakarņa's body, and received others from him and discharged them.
 The Raksasa, that one, greatly afflicted with the arrow, then became exceedingly enraged, and that one of great strength, that enhancer of the delight of Sumitra.
 As the wind cover the evening clouds with his shafts, so Arjuna covered with his shafts that beautiful and auspicious golden armour.
 Like the sun bespangled with clouds, that hero, who had been pierced with golden arrows, resembling a mass of blue collyrium, looked beautiful.
 Then that fierce Rākşasa, the augmenter of the joy of Sumitrā's son, and resembling the roar of clouds, said to him in words not taking him seriously.
 Forsooth, you have told the world of my bravery in battle, when I fought without the least fear, even with the king of Death himself.
 When the warriors are thus fighting on the field of battle, is not the king, who is the bestower of battle, to be considered as a superior warrior, who is worshipped even by his enemies.
 And riding on Airavata, the lord of the celestials was surrounded by all the gods. And Shakra was never before placed in the front of battle.
 O son of Sumitra, I am this day propitiated with your childish prowess, and I wish to go back after bidding adieu to Rāghava.
 I have been pleased with you in battle, by your prowess, strength and energy. I wish to kill only Rāma, on whose destruction all will be slain.
 On Rāma being killed in battle, I will fight with the remaining warriors of the enemy, by means of my own forces.
 Having said these words, the son of Sumitrā, smiling, said to Rākşasa the following awful words, which are fit to be said in the presence of heroes.
 O hero, what you have said is true. I have seen your prowess. O Dasaratha's son, Rama, like a mountain, stands here.
 Hearing this and disregarding Lakshmana, the powerful night-ranger Kumbhakarna rushed at Rama, shaking the earth.
 Then Rama, the son of Dasaratha, employing the dreadful weapon, began to send sharp shafts into the heart of Kumbhakarna.
 And as he was rushing at Rāma with a rage, his three rays, mixed with smoke, were extinguished.
 Rāma, the foremost of Raksasas, being well versed in arms, began to roar furiously and rushed against the monkeys, terrifying them in the conflict.
 The arrows, that were like the feathers of peacocks, fell on his breast. And the mace, that had been hurled by him, fell on the ground from his grasp. And all his weapons were strewn over the field. And when that highly powerful hero saw that he had lost all his weapons, he began to make a terrible havoc of the ranks of his enemies with his two arms and two hands.
 His body pierced by the arrows and besmeared with blood, looked as beautiful as a mountain with water flowing down from its top.
 Overwhelmed by his anger, and intoxicated with blood, he began to range, killing monkeys, Raksasas and birds.
 Then that powerful one, resembling Death himself, that fierce one of terrible prowess, aiming at Rama, struck Bhima with his arrows.
 Then Rāma, the descendant of Kakustha, equipped with a bow, cut off the mount with seven straight arrows. Thereafter the foremost of the Bharata race, the righteous-souled Rāma, with golden arrows, cut off the lofty mount, resembling the summit of Meru, and to it, like to a cloud, descended two hundred monkeys.
 At this time, the virtuous Lakşmaņa, having tried by many means, spoke to Rāma, saying, 'The time has come for compassing the destruction of Kumbhakarņa.'
 O king, he does not know that he is eating his own kinsmen; he does not know the Rākşasas; and he is very hungry.
 Let the foremost monkeys range all round the field. And let the leaders of the monkey-hosts, like to the main forces of an army, remain on the field, ready to take up their positions.
 Being oppressed by the load of his preceptor, this wicked-minded monkey is going about the earth, and is not killing any other monkeys.
 Hearing the words of the intelligent son of the Wind-god, the mighty Kumbhakarna, along with his sons, became highly delighted.
 Kumbhakarna, being highly enraged, assailed with great violence those apes that were seated on the monkeys' shoulders.
 Having seen those monkeys killed, Rāma, enraged, saying, “Oh, the Rākşasa is too strong," rose up and took a good bow.
 His eyes were red in rage and his eyes seemed to be burning. And that hero, Rāghava, with great velocity, rushed against the Rākşasa, making all the leaders of the forces, oppressed with Kumbhakarna's might, exceedingly glad.
 Then taking up his bow, resembling a snake, hard to draw, and made of burnished gold, Rāma cheered up his brother and leapt up, with the string of his bow and shafts still attached to his fingers.
 Surrounded by those monkeys, who were incapable of being vanquished, the hero Lakşmaņa, accompanied by Hanuman, set out.
 And that highly powerful one saw the high-souled and represser of enemies Arjuna with eyes red with blood, like the lord of the clouds. And he saw that one resembling the Vindhya or the Meru, wearing a golden Angada, having a countenance bathed in blood, and dropping blood from his mouth like the clouds. And he saw him biting the monkeys, with his tongue, and smeared with blood, and resembling the Destroyer himself.
 Beholding the foremost of the Rakshasas, who shone like a flaming fire, that best of men, stretched his bow.
 That foremost of the Rākşasas, burning with rage, unable to bear that roar, rushed towards Rāghava.
 Thereupon Rāma spoke to Kumbhakarna, whose arms resembled the serpents and whose neck resembled the clouds, who resembled the earth in her waters and who was as huge as a mountain, saying.
 I am incapable of being slain by you with your weapons. I shall kill you in a moment. Therefore, O destroyer of the race of Rākşasas, do you not kill me with your weapons.
 And knowing him to be Rāma, he sent up a hideous yell, and, worked up with anger, rushed at the monkeys, frightening them.
 And as if breaking the hearts of the dwellers of the woods, that one of gigantic proportions, resembling the cloud, smilingly said to Rāma, I am not Virādha, nor Kābandha, nor Khara, nor Vali, nor Mārīca, nor Kumbhakarna, who have come here.
 Behold my terrible mace of iron, capable of bearing the touch of all metals. With this mace I vanquished the celestials and the Danavas in days of yore.
 It is not proper for you to disregard me. It is a small matter for me, the loss of my nose; but it is a great matter for you, the loss of your life.
 O illustrious hero, O you of great prowess, show me your might on your person. I shall then eat you up having seen your prowess.
 Hearing the words of Kumbhakarna, Rama, with wings spread, let off arrows. Pierced with those arrows, winged by the force of the wind and shot with the velocity of the thunderbolt, the lord of the celestials did not stir nor did he experience any pain.
 The arrows discharged by Kumbhakarna, that were like the thunder-bolt of Indra himself, began to inflict pain on Rāvana's body.
 And, O king, like to the stream of a river, the enemy of Mahendra (Rāvana) drank up with his body the impetus of Rāma's shafts. And discharging his mace of dreadful impetus, he baffled the impetus of Rāma's shafts.
 Then that Rākşasa, taking up a mace of exceeding impetuosity, and of the form of a thunder-bolt, and throwing it at the celestial army, began to rout the monkey-host.
 Thereupon Rama, taking up the weapon called Vayavya, hurled it at the Rākşasa. Thereupon the night-ranger's arm was cut off by that arm having the speed of the wind. And thereat the armless one began to make a terrible noise.
 That arm of the lord of monkeys, resembling a mountain-peak, resembling the sea and having been cut off by Raghava's shaft, fell into the midst of the monkey-division. And Rāma having cut off that arm, began to slay the monkey host.
 The monkeys, their forces broken and slain, and now deprived of their king and lord, became exceedingly dejected and, with their limbs sore and their persons exhausted, they beheld the destruction of the monarch and his counsellors.
 And with his hands the mighty-armed hero, resembling the king of mountains with his arms broken by his antagonist, tore up a tree, and, rushing against the king, began to assail him with it.
 And Rāma with his wind-giving shaft resembling a serpent and having the effulgence of gold, struck that uplifted arm of his, resembling a tree and resembling a snake, and equipped with three Indra weapons.
 Then the arm of Kumbhakarna resembling a hill, was cut off and fell down on the ground, moving, destroying trees, mountains, stones, monkeys and Raksasas.
 Beholding his arm cut off, the Rakshasa rushed towards Rama and roared like a lion. But Rama, taking up a pair of arrows, sharp as the moon and whetted on stone, cut off his legs in the battle.
 Shriking Lankā, the city of the Rākşasas, with their armies and monkeys and the sea and the mountains and the caves, the two, displaying their prowess, began to destroy the hosts.
 And his arms and feet were stretched out and his face was distorted like that of a she-demon. And he ran after Rāma, roaring like Rāhu in the welkin, after having split the moon.
 O Sharangadhara, Rāma, with his arrows, furnished with golden wings and furnished with feathers, did not fill up the mouth of the elephant, but he, with a full face, could not speak. He then, in distress, swooned away.
 Thereupon Rāma took up a sharp, sharpened, and pointed shaft, furnished with golden wings, having the semblance of the sun and the sun's rays, and having the form of Brahma's rod, the wind, and Death himself, and having the form of the seasons, and resembling the thunder-bolt of Mahendra, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having the form of the wind and the sun and the moon and the fire and the lightning, and having
 That arrow, sent forth by Raghava's arm, illumining the ten cardinal points with its own effulgence, resembling the fire of the solar disc and having the splendour of the thunder-bolt, coursed its way in the sky, having the prowess of Sakra's thunder-bolt.
 He cut-off the head of the lord of the Rakshasas, which resembled a huge mountain, which had a well-formed face, which had sharp teeth, which had ears like lotus petals, which was fickle and which was dreadful. He cut-off the head in the same way as Purandara cut-off the head of Vritra.
 In the evening, Kumbhakarna's large head, adorned with ear-rings, appears like the moon in the sky at the time of the rising of the sun.
 The Rakshasa's head, resembling a mountain, and smitten with the Rama's arrows, fell down. It broke the roof and the gates of the mansion, and the wall with the trees in it.
 Thereupon the Rakshasa, the huge and terrible Atikaya, fell into the sea, and began to devour all the fish, crabs, sharks and other creatures.
 When the mighty enemy of the Brahmanas and the gods, Kumbhakarna, had been killed, the earth began to tremble with joy, and all the gods began to give forth loud shouts.
 Then the celestials, the Rishis, the Pannagas, the gods, the Bhutas, the Suparnas, the Guhyakas, the Yakshas, the Gandharvas, and the inhabitants of heaven, were all delighted with Rama's prowess.
 And on the slaughter of that one, the learned and the kings of the Nairtta race, with their friends, set up a loud wail, like to elephants lamenting on seeing the king of the monkeys.
 And as the sun, having dispelled the darkness of night, appears shining, so Rāma, having slain Kumbhakarna in battle, appeared in the midst of the monkey-forets.
 When the exceedingly strong son of the king was slain, the monkeys, delighted, like lotuses opening their petals, worshipped the illustrious and well-begotten Rāghava, who was entitled to the best share of everything.
 Having thus slain that Kumbhakarna, the foremost of the Suras and the invincible hero of all great battles, the eldest brother of Bharata, the descendant of Ikshvaku, was delighted like the lord of the celestials himself, having slain the great Asura Vritra in battle.
 While Bharata was speaking, those messengers, fatigued, entered, the inviolable and beautiful city of the king, which was like a palace.
 And going to the king and being honoured by the prince, they, taking the feet of the king, spoke to Bharata these words.
 The priest enquired after your health, and so did the ministers. Do you set out, however, for the capital as speedily as possible. The business of the state demands your presence.
 O you of large eyes, accepting these costly robes and ornaments, give them to my maternal uncle.
 In this country, there were twenty crores of the maternal uncle of the king and ten crores of the sons of the king.
 Having thus accepted everything, Bharata, ever devoted to his friends, worshipped the messengers and thus addressed them,
 Is the king my father, Dasaratha, well? And is Rāma, and the high-souled Laksmana, well?
 The pious, the righteous, the learned, the speaker of truth, Kausalyā, the mother of the intelligent Rāma, is free from all ailments.
 Is Sumitra, the virtuous mother of Lakşmaņa and the heroic Satrughna, hale and hearty?
 My mother Kekayi, being always full of vanity, anger, and pride, is always desirous of doing what is for her own good. She is always healthy. What has she said?
 Thus accosted by the high-souled Bharata, those messengers said to him these words in a tone of conciliation.
 O foremost of men, I wish that all those whom you wish well may be happy. I also wish that the lotus-faced goddess of prosperity may accept you and that your car may be yoked.
 And Bharata also, thus addressed by the ambassadors, said to them: I have come to pay my respects to the great king, the ambassadors have urged me on.
 Having said this to the messengers, the son of Pritha, Bharata, thus addressed his mother.
 O king, I shall go to my father's presence at your command. I shall come back to you when you shall remember me.
 Thus addressed by Bharata, the king, the grandfather of Rāma, addressing the auspicious words to the descendant of Raghu, bowed to him.
 "O son, I give you permission. Kausalya is your mother. Do you report to her your welfare, O chastiser of foes, and your father's also."
 And those foremost of the twice-born, who are capable of performing the priestly duties, and the two brothers, the mighty bowmen, Rāma and Laksmana, O son, are all present here.
 Having duly honoured Bharata, the king of the Kekayas presented to him choice horses, costly blankets and silken robes.
 He gave him two large dogs, having their teeth grown long and resembling tigers in strength and prowess.
 Having made presents of sixteen thousand horses and two thousand chariots of gold to the son of the Kaikeya prince, the Kaikeyas gave him wealth.
 Ashvapati soon sent his trusted and honest courtiers to Bharata, who was following his elder brother.
 His maternal uncle gave him, as a present, many swift and beautiful elephants with their trunks well furnished with tusks.
 Bharata, the son of Kekaya, did not accept the wealth which was offered by the chief of the Kekayas, being eager to set out.
 The thought of the king's son that he had seen a dream was greatly increased by the haste of the messengers.
 He then went out of his palace, which was filled with men and elephants and horses. He then reached a most excellent and pleasant high road.
 And then passing by (that) splendid palace, Bharata saw a better one (than that); and then the graceful Bharata entered it, like one who has been invited.
 Having asked his maternal uncle Yudhajit and his mother for permission, Bharata mounted the car with Satrughna and set out.
 Having yoked a hundred cars and mandalas, Uştragho, the son of Vrishaparva, followed Bharata.
 Protected by his brothers and his counsellors, who were equal to himself in strength and in counsel, the high-souled Bharata, proceeded from the cave like to a Siddha going to the region of Indra.
 Hearing those words of the high-souled Sugriva, Hanumān began to cross the mountain Rșyamūka where the descendant of Raghu were.
 Thereupon, Hanuman, the son of the Wind-god, assuming the form of a mendicant, changed his guise by means of his crafty understanding, for the purpose of seeing the princess.
 Thereupon, Hanumān, having arrived, saluted the heroic brothers with folded hands and spoke to them with a sweet and agreeable speech. And he addressed those foremost of monkeys in the following words, “How have you arrived at this country? And why are you so terrified, O you of beautiful countenance? And why do you look at the trees on the banks of Pampā? And why do you look at this river with its beautiful water? And how are your robes of bark? And why are you breathing hard? And why are you tormenting the people? And why are you looked at by the lions? And why are you holding your bows of the colour of the clouds? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you beautiful and endowed with excellent features? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And why are you like to elephants in your arms? And why are you of beautiful features? And why are you of great strength and prowess? And
 Two heroes have come from the celestial region; they are of the same appearance, have eyes like lotus petals and wear matted locks on their heads.
 As if by chance the sun and the moon have appeared in the sky. And those two heroes of expansive chests, resembling gods in human forms, having lions for their necks, having great energy, resembling each other, having arms like those of two elephants, broad and round, having arms like bludgeons, deserving of all ornaments, what for do they not adorn themselves? I deem both of them worthy to be protected by me, in order to protect this whole earth, bounded by the sea, with her forests, and with her mountains Vindhya and Meru.
 And these graceful bows with their variegated and variegated bowstrings, and furnished with the various kinds of variegated leathers, look as resplendent as the thunderbolt of Indra decked with gold.
 Their quivers are well filled with excellent arrows, and their faces are cheerful; and like serpents of virulent venom, they are bent on taking their lives.
 Those two birds, of gigantic stature, of fair complexion, adorned with ear-rings, shine like snakes freed from their sloughs.
 Why does he not speak to me thus when I am speaking to him thus? There is a foremost of monkeys named Sugriva, virtuous-souled and heroic, who, being thus wronged by his brother, is wandering about the world, distressed with grief.
 I have come here having been despatched by the high-souled Sugriva, the king of monkeys. My name is Hanumān,
 I have come here to visit Sugriva, who is of virtuous soul and who wishes to make friends with me. I have come here as a mendicant with disguised appearance, for the sake of Sugriva and his wife. I have come here from Rksyamuka as a mendicant, capable of going anywhere at will and at his will.
 Having thus spoken to those heroic brothers Rama and Lakshmana, Hanumān, versed in the use of speech, again said,
 Hearing these words of his brother, the graceful Rāma, with a cheerful countenance, addressed his brother, who was seated by his side.
 This is the minister of the high-souled Sugriva, the king of monkeys. It is for me that he has come here.
 Thereupon that chastiser of foes, the son of Sumitra, addressing that monkey, the minister of Sugriva, with sweet words, spoke to that one conversant with speech, in words fraught with love.
 A person who is not well read in the Vedas, who does not recite the Yajur Veda, and who is not well read in the Samaveda, cannot speak thus.
 He had certainly acquired a complete knowledge of the science of grammar. He had read and heard many things; and he had never failed to express himself.
 In my face, eyes, forehead and brows and in my other limbs, there is some defect which is visible.
 There should be no hesitation, no delay, no pain and the words should come from the heart and not from the throat. The words should be spoken in a medium tone.
 The beautiful, the sweet and the heart-pleasing words, of the highly intelligent wife, well versed in the duties of a house-holder, are pronounced in sweet voice, well articulated and without any hesitation.
 What man is there whose mind is not gratified by such sweet, charming and graceful speech as this, which is full of allusions and all sorts of meanings.
 How can a person succeed in his work, if his messenger is of the kind I have described?
 If a man has many honest, intelligent and capable ministers, his affairs are sure to prosper by their means.
 Then that one cognizant of words, spoke to that monkey, the counsellor of Sugrīva, who was the offspring of the Wind-god, versed in words.
 O learned one, we know the virtues of that high-souled monkey, Sugriva. And this is the way by which we shall go to that lord of monkeys, Sugriva.
 O Hanuman, we shall do all that you have said, at the command of Sugriva, even as you have said, O you of good speech.
 Hearing these words of his, the wind-god's son-the monkey, waxing exceedingly glad, replied, saying, "Having said this, the son of Sumitra, having collected his thoughts, resolved to make friends with them in order to secure victory."
 Beholding Rāghava, distressed and deprived of his speech, and like the moon fallen down, Lakşmaņa, delighted, spoke to him in sweet accents.
 O you of mighty arms, it behoves you not to grieve for me, for the course of time is such that it has already been fixed for my destruction.
 O gentle one, destroy me with confidence; maintain your vow. O Kākutstha, men of weak vows, go to hell.
 If, O great king, you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have been pleased with me, and if you have
 Thus addressed by Lakşmaņa, Rāma, whose senses had been stupefied, summoned his ministers and the priest and told them what had taken place between Durvasa and the ascetic.
 Having heard this, the ministers and the preceptors assembled together. Then the highly energetic Vasishtha said.
 O you of long arms, the destruction of your hair, the separation from Lakshmana, and the absence of Rama, O you of great fame, have been seen.
 Renouncing this kingdom, that is powerful, do not keep your promise in vain. When your promise is broken, virtue itself becomes destroyed.
 If virtue be annihilated, there is no doubt, the entire universe, mobile and immobile, with the celestials and Rishis would be destroyed.
 Therefore, O foremost of men, for the protection of the three worlds, do you, to-day, without Lakşmaņa, rule the world.
 Hearing their united words, full of the meanings of virtue and profit, Rāma spoke to Laksmana in the midst of the assembly,
 O son of Sumitrā, I do not wish to cast you off, lest you should commit a sin. Renunciation and death are equally the duties of the good.
 Hearing the words of Rāma, with his senses overwhelmed with tears, Laksmana speedily went away, and did not enter his own house.
 Arriving at the banks of the Sarayu, he touched the water with his hands, folding his hands, and checked his breath, but did not give vent to a sigh.
 The celestials, the Rishis and the Pishachas, the Apsaras and all the tribes of the Siddhas came to him and began to shower flowers upon him.
 Then taking up Laksmana, who was invisible to all and had a human form, the highly powerful Sakra entered the celestial region.
 Then those foremost of the celestials, the delighted and delighted gods, with joyful hearts, adored Rāghava who had come there for one fourth part of Vişņu.
 When Rama had gone out of the asylum, the space between him and Laksmana, O descendant of Raghu, became empty. And Rama, afflicted with grief, asked the son of Sumitra, saying,
 And he said: Why have you come hither, leaving behind Mithilā, when, knowing that you had placed confidence in me, I had left her in the woods alone?
 Seeing you arrive, I was about to forsake the kingdom of the Mithilā prince. O Laksmana, my mind is greatly distressed with the fear that a great sin is about to be committed.
 My left eye is filled with tears and my right arm feels pain, O Lakşmaņa, beholding you at a distance in the forest, separated from Sītā.
 Being thus accosted by Sumitra's son, the auspiciously featured Lakşmaņa, stricken with grief, once more spoke to the miserable Rāma, saying.
 I did not come here of my own accord, but urged by those powerful ones I have come before you.
 The sweet words of Laksmana, resembling the speech of a noble man, and containing the word "Save," had already reached the ears of the daughter of the king of Mithila.
 Hearing his voice, that lady of Mithilā, oppressed with fear and sorrow, began to weep and repeatedly cried, “Go, go.”
 Urged by me repeatedly with many words, Maithili, thus replied to me, with a mind resolved to do what I desired.
 I do not see any Rakshasa, that is capable of affrighting him. This fear of his is gone, there is no such thing as this, for it has not been mentioned by any one.
 How will the noble ones speak of that which is low and mean? O Sītā, he will say, “Save me,” who will seek shelter with the deities themselves.
 What is the reason, O Laksmana, for which I have been thus addressed by my brother, taking me by my arm and uttering these words fraught with fear to me, saying, "Save me."
 O beautiful lady, O you having a beautiful face, for your welfare I shall tell you what has been said by the Rakshasa. You need not be alarmed. The men (of the palace) will save you.
 Better that you go without the king. Be not anxious for him. There is no man in the three worlds, born or unborn, who can defeat Rāghava in battle. Rāghava is incapable of being defeated in battle by the gods headed by Sakra.
 Thus addressed by him, Vaidehī, with her senses confounded, with her eyes shedding tears, spoke to me these harsh words.
 All my energies are devoted to your destruction, for, the destruction of your brother, I have not to look to any other object.
 By the signal of Bharata, you have followed Rāma. But you do not obey the command of Rāma who has been so earnestly calling you.
 You are an enemy, who, acting under disguise, follow me for my sake. You wish to be near Rāghava, but do not seek him.
 Thus addressed by Vaidehi, Rāvana, of red eyes, in consequence of his anger, and his lips trembling, came out of the asylum.
 Hearing the words of Sumitra's son, Rāma, wrought up with sorrow, said to the gentle Lakşmaņa, that you have come here without that one (Sita).
 And though you know me capable of protecting the Rākşasas, yet, for this your wrathful speech, have you gone out of the city of Mithilā.
 O Maithili, I am not contented with you. Hearing the harsh words of a woman, you have come here.
 Do you not obey my commands, being under the control of anger, on account of your being moved by Sītā?
 This Rākşasa, wounded with my shaft, lies down, who in the guise of a deer carried me away from the hermitage.
 Then drawing his bow and placing an arrow on it, I shot it at him with the help of my well-trained weapons. Then the Rākşasa, having his arms paralysed, gave up his body, and uttered a loud yell, and then fell down dead on the ground, with his jewelled armlets on.
 And having been addressed by that one, having a voice like to the rumbling of a distant hill, I did hear those harsh words, and I am come here, forsaking Maithili.
 Having reached that lake abounding in lotuses, lilies, and tortoises, Rāma with Sumitrā's son, began to lament with his senses all worked up.
 Beholding his sister (Kausalyā) he became worked up with joy, and his senses were moved. And he, being influenced by his desire, thus spoke to Sumitrā's son.
 O Sumitra's son, the lake Pampā, with its water as transparent as the lapis lazuli, looks beautiful with its lotuses and lilies and with various trees.
 O Sumitra's son, behold the delightful forest of Pampā, in which stand the hills and the trees as if crowned with trees.
 And oppressed with grief and sorrow, I am suffering greatly from the grief of Bharata and the loss of Vaidehī.
 Even to the grief-stricken Pampā the forest with its diverse flowers, its cool and delightful waters, its banks filled with lotuses, its charming aspect, its serpents and beasts of prey, its wild animals and birds, appears beautiful.
 The forest, covered with various kinds of trees, looked beautiful. It was full of blue and yellow flowers which seemed to be scattered over the ground.
 O son of Sumitra, the season is agreeable to the senses, the tops of the trees are loaded with flowers and the entire forest is covered with creepers and trees full of blossoms. O brother, the breeze is sweet and the month is full of fragrance and the trees are full of flowers and fruits.
 Behold, O son of Sumitra, the forests filled with blossoms, as if pouring forth a shower of flowers in various hues like to the clouds pouring rain.
 On the charming rocks, the trees of the forest, shaken by the force of the wind, drop flowers on the ground.
 O Saumitri, see the wind sport all around with the fallen, flying and green leaves.
 With the wind as his charioteer, he (the monkey) follows the six-legged (monkey), with the trees with their blossoms shaken in various ways.
 As if to draw the trees towards him with the sweet notes of his Kokilas, the wind issuing from the mountains and caves, blew as if it was uttering some sweet song.
 Being thus blown by the wind on all sides, these trees with their tops entwined together looked as if bound together.
 The cool air, that had a fragrance like that of sandal, carried with it the odour of the sacrificial fire.
 These trees, blown by the wind, are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and are uttering their cries, and
